love the way you interact with
our communities representing our
small businesses, and also the
passion and the personal
approach that you gave to
everyone is just refreshing for
city government. As a
commissioner and board. So I
know that you're not going to go
away. It this is free you up to
do a lot more and more
meaningful things that you
wanted to pursue in your career
and your personal life. So I
wanted to say I MISS You a lot
sitting between me and director
hemminger passing note to each
other. But but I really wish you
the best of the best for the
future. Whatever you want to be.
And thank you for your service.
So as the most junior one here,
I just want to thank you for the
example that you set and the
voice that you've been for the
business owners, for the
community members. I think that
it is really, really, really
important. To you, to the
community, the voice that you've
given and I you know, one of the
things about thought leadership
is sometimes, you know,
sometimes it's hard. It's
sometimes you're not liked, you
know, and sometimes times in
order to lead, you have to be
willing to step out there and
not necessarily be liked, but be
that leader. And I feel like,
you have found a way to find the
right intersection between
having folks love you very much
and also so leading us in the
right direction. And so I really
do want to offer my support to
the endeavors that you have
coming up. And I appreciate the
example that you set in the
doors that you've opened for us
as commissioners and for this
agency, really. So best wishes
and I'll hand it back over to my
to the chair. Thank you,
colleagues. Director hensley I'm
just creating some space in case
you want to chime in. I guess.
That be beyond because to bid
our esteemed former colleague
farewell here, you know
directory and I were co
nominated together. We we've
literally been in these trenches
together and you will be leaving
a hole on this board. You
represent a very unique
community and you brought a
voice to really be able to try
to unify all different
communities and all different
perspectives and that is the
spirit of unification that we
need into the government. Um, in
general. So I, I, I know that
you're not going far, far as our
colleagues have said, and I know
that this will free you up to
impact the city and, and the
world and other ways and we, I
think we all look forward to
hearing what those ways will be.
And I know that you will also
continue to hold this board
accountable for really the
values that you stand for and
continue to apply that managed
way. And what ever other area of
the of the corners of the world
that you choose to have impact
in. So I know that we'll all be
in touch, keep you in touch as
friends. And so and thank you
for your service. Thank you.
Director kowtow. The floor is
yours. Do I have two minutes?
Well, thank you very much,
colleagues. I guess former
colleagues. I started on the
small business commission and I
think I started about 6 or 9
months before the pandemic. And
then in the middle of the
pandemic was brought to you all.
And like I said, in the last
meeting, it has been a huge
honor to especially sit next to
steve heminger for so long and
learned so much from you. You've
been such a great mentor to me.
Yeah, I guess the city really
this city really took me in and
gave me a home. And just to be a
young person and a and a
business owner and a openly gay
person to sit where you all sit.
Oh, my GOD. Sorry yeah, it's a
huge honor because this, this
this city is all I have. So so
we do great work here. And I
think as I look back on the
years that I've spent on this
board, the memories that I will
cherish the most are actually
the sometimes ungodly hour that
I had been called to visit and
tour some of our facilities to
hand out what seems like the
only breakfast burrito that we
give to employees at every
single company event. But in
seriousness, to meet the people
who, some of whom have spent
over 40 years, which is older
than I am, you know, making our
agency work, waking up every
morning in an unglamorous way to
do the work of moving this city
forward. We have amazing people
that work for us, really,
honestly, some of the greatest
public employees I've ever met.
And so it was an honor to
represent them up there. It was
an honor to try to do the job
well. And yes, I think to bring
a sense of unity to this work.
It made me sad. And sometimes
sitting where you're sitting,
seeing our city seem so divided
and to see neighbors yelling at
neighbors, to see taxi drivers
yelling at each other and
seemingly at everyone else, and
to see us try to do some big,
bold, exciting things and to and
to find the communities
struggling to accept it. And I
guess if I could leave you with
anything, it would just be that
a reminder that there are much
bigger problems out there than
whether or not there are
barricades in the middle of the
street or slightly off center,
and that we need to see the
bigger picture with some of our
projects and that my hope is
that the public, when they come
to speak to you, that they do so
with a little bit more respect.
It was really hard sitting up
there and getting screamed at
and yelled at and to have verbal
tomatoes thrown at me and not be
able to either respond back or
just say, you know, I'm a person
to you. And I think for the
public behind me and those
listening, just remember that
the folks that you're providing
your comment to, they also have
feelings and they're just trying
to do their their job for the
employees of our agency, in
particular, the folks who are in
our offices, I would love our I
would love to see our agency be
the agency of. Yes. And the
agency of let's try it. Is that
am I being I'm being walked off
because what's clear to me is in
this city, in our government, we
do not create an incentive
structure for our city employees
to take risks. There are too
many ways in which that risk
taking can bite them in the butt
. And I think we really need to
start doing that. We really need
to start incentivize using our
employees, our bureaucrats, our
leadership to be willing to try
things and see if they work, as
opposed to being afraid of
angering, whether it's the
public or the communities,
because otherwise we're not
going to continue to be the
innovative city that we all want
us to be. And finally, to you
all, I know what it's like to
sit there. I know how hard it is
to make these decisions. And I
know how sometimes it can feel
like you are in fact, at a
potted plant and my challenge to
you is to remember our customers
. Our customers are the people
who take muni, of course, and we
need to keep our system clean
and safe. And our customers are
the people who are getting
parking tickets and are getting
their car towed in the middle of
the night because they parked in
the wrong place. They deserve
your attention too. And so to
constantly be thinking about how
we treat our customers with love
and respect and to try to do
what's best for them and
finally, you do. We didn't
always agree on everything, but
we always disagreed respectfully
. And I feel very honored to
have been able to be in the
trenches with you, to serve on
this agency. C during a once in
a century crisis, and to see you
really rise to the occasion. It
wasn't easy. And no matter what
you do from here on out and how
the agency continues to grow and
progress, I hope you know that
you did something really special
by pulling us out of such a dark
time and doing it with such
honor and such diligence and
such clear commitment to this
city. So congratulations on
doing that. And thank you,
everyone, very much. I
appreciate this. And I guess
I'll continue to try to do my
work in the manny's way. Thank
you, manny. Other items of new
or unfinished with manny's.
We're here with us. Okay. We
have the photographer here. Yeah
manny, can you come up here? Can
we take a photo with you the
whole. Time guess maybe I'll
just shoot from here. Yeah
maybe. Right up in the middle.
Yeah.
Okay this is you guys. Thank you
. Okay. Okay. Here we go. Thank
you. Thank you. Thank you. All
right, colleagues, are there
other items of new or unfinished
business for today. Okay.
Hearing none, we will open the
item for public comment for
anyone in the room. Okay. Seeing
none, please open a remote at
this time. We'll move to remote
public comment not to exceed a
total time of ten minutes.
Members of the public wishing to
comment should star three to
enter the queue. Each speaker
will have two minutes. Moderator
for speaker. For a little. More.
Speaker you've been unmuted. Do
we have. Speaker can you talk
closer to your mic, please? Sure
sure. I'd recommend we go to the
next caller. It sounds like
they're listening to the meeting
on the computer. Next speaker.
Hi, sorry, I'm rocking. My day
will come in a while. I sing it.
If I were very good at it.
Speaker you've been unmuted. Oh,
manny boy, the pipes, the pipes
are calling. We will MISS You so
much having you up there. You
did wonders for the board and
for speaking what's so many of
us were thinking, especially on
december 6th, 2022, when we will
be called for everyone to lay
down their arms and for the
agency to do what's right and
connect our city for people
outside of cars. And I thank you
and I thank all of the joy, the
joy that you would bring to the
meeting and your patience and
your humor. You are one of a
kind and I'm very sorry that
you're leaving too soon. But I
know that you are doing great
things in this world and will
continue to do so, especially
for our city. So thank you.
Thanks, manny jen psaki by.
Thank you. Let's return back to
the first speaker. Speaker
you've been unmuted.
Sure you can. Sounds like they
don't know they've been unmuted
and that's the last caller. The
last caller. Okay we will then
go ahead and close public
comment and please call the next
item places you an item number
seven, the director's report.
Good afternoon. Directors got a
lot of items covered today. But
first and foremost, I want to
bring up transit director julie
kirschbaum and our cfo and just
transit director julie
kirschbaum, who will be offering
a special recognition. I happen
to know that barry is biking
here, so she tries to blame
muni. Don't take it. I'm excited
to be here to present to people
that I think really embody the
agency of yes, that manny was
just talking about was just
giving you a hard time. I'm not
one of the people of. Yes do you
want to start? Oh, sure. Good
afternoon, board members. My
name is barry. I'm the cfo of
the mta and as julie said, we're
very excited to be here to
present a recognition award to
diana hammons, who is the senior
manager of revenue collections
and sales. Her team is
responsible for gathering up all
of the money and all of the fare
media that make both parking and
transit run, as well as leslie
bernfield, who plans special
events for transit. And for me,
this is a particularly special
moment because diana hired me in
2006 to my first job at the mta.
Leslie has done, I think, a
masterful job of improving both
our internal and our external
communication lines around
special events. And especially
as the city recovers, as there's
been such an attention on to
special events. But I'm
particularly excited about the
way that she partnered and
collaborated with diana,
particularly around outside
lands outside lands is a 75,000
person event. It's essentially
like having for chase center
events. All all over three days.
And we for a long time have
really wanted to have the same
model that we have for chase
where your ticket to the event
is your ticket to muni and in
this case, it will now be your
bracelet to outside lands. Is
your ticket to muni and leslie
and diana worked really closely
with the outside events team to
understand the experience that
the event wanted to deliver to
review the lessons learned from
previous years, to really figure
out where we could commit, but
also making sure that we didn't
overcommit it. And as a result
that we were able to get
agreement on this really
exciting event and partnership.
Also special thanks to the
outside land producer. Another
planet entertainment for helping
us reach this milestone on and
just you know in the same way
that brie and I are constant
collaborating as we move this
forward, we also wanted to
celebrate where we're seeing our
team collaborate is that it? So
and that is all we have. Well,
we got to give them the because
come on up. Come on up. Just.
Hello everybody. Nice to be
here. Thank you so much to you
and to julie and my manager,
sean, for this recognition. And
it's truly a pleasure to be part
of throwing these events that
make san francisco what it is.
And to introduce transit as part
of the integral experience of
coming to, to and from all of
those events. I just also want
to recognize my colleagues from
dispatching demetrius jackson,
the operators who are out there
with incredible enthusiasm under
the leadership of anthony over
here from t52 and oh, and also
edward dennis and our
incredible, incredible field
team that supports the operators
on the field during this event.
So thank you. Good afternoon.
Board of directors. Thank you
for this recognition. Thank you.
Brie and julie for this. I think
julie's taking a little pleasure
in this because she knows how
uncomfortable I am in this
moment. But I do want to say I'm
so grateful for the opportunity
that I've been given in this
agency to work on such special
projects that are so important
to the city. But also the space
that is created for me to be
able to do that is really the
amazing team that I have that I
work with, including fred
shelton, our revenue operations
manager, our juan pena, the
acting manager of our station
and permit section, and emmett
nelson, who's our program
development manager and manages
all of our discount programs. So
so I'm very grateful for this.
Thank you all. Thank you.
Director tomlin. The board.
Thank you, sir, for your
service. And congratulations on
your recognition. And thank you
also to leadership for
continuing to make spaces to
specifically acknowledge a
contribution of staff. I think
it's important to educate the
board and the public about the
meaningful contributions of the
members of this community. Back
to you. Director tomlin. Thank
you. And I do just want to
acknowledge that. So much of the
real work that happens in this
agency goes unreported. And
certainly the people who are
doing that real work, people
like leslie and diana, exemplify
the hard working, dedicated
staff of this agency that make
me so proud to be working for
them. So thank you, team. All
right. Lots to cover. I hope all
of you know that there is this
little event next week called
apec. We're starting to see some
of the preparatory impacts for
most city agencies. It has been
all hands on deck the last
couple of weeks. And I really
want to thank tony henderson,
who is our command command in
chief for organizing everyone at
the agency. And julie
kirschbaum, who's been leading
the executive level and the
hundreds and hundreds of people
who are working to try to make
this event a success. This is a
pretty big deal for san
francisco. This is the biggest
international event that the
city has hosted since the united
nations charter was signed in
san francisco in 1945. PRESIDENT
Biden will be here along with
chinese PRESIDENT Xi jinping and
world leaders from around the
pacific rim. The main impacts of
the event are going to be felt
starting monday, NOVEMBER 13th
through sunday, NOVEMBER 19th,
and will be mainly concentrated
in the areas surrounding the
moscone center and at the top of
nob hill. But there are events
all over san francisco, and so
there will be traffic impacts
associated with motorcades and
many of the events are in flux.
So our team is responding to
constant changes. If world
leaders suddenly want to have a
new get together at the last
minute, that is something that
our team will figure out how to
accommodate. But it is also
resulted in some pretty
significant transit impacts. And
I really want to thank both the
transit team, but especially the
united states. Secret service
for taking the needs of san
francisco neighborhood residents
and small business is seriously
while also maintaining the
security for all of these world
leaders. So our team has been
able to deal with the fact that
moscone yerba buena station on
the central subway will need to
be closed. So we will be
rerouting the t third trains via
the embarcadero into the market
street subway and merging it
with the k trains, just like we
did before the central subway
opened. So that's a familiar
pattern. We're also really
grateful that we'll be able to
run a very frequent shuttle
train from powell street station
and union square station,
straight to chinatown and back
about every five minutes, making
sure that chinatown stays very
connected to all of the events
happening around apec. There'll
be a number of bus reroutes, all
of those transportation details
can be found on our website at
sfmta dot com slash api c that's
sfmta.Com/ apec. We are
updating that website at more
than daily. Given the pace of
changes that we are receiving
from the secret service. And on
that website you can also sign
up for text or email updates to
better understand how to be able
to get around san francisco,
whether it is by driving or
paratransit or walking or biking
or muni. We'll also have
information available in over
100 languages via 301 and have
recruited broadly for volunteers
who will be serving as
ambassadors at all key places
throughout the city, including
throughout the transit system to
not only help san franciscans
get around, but to also help
foreign visitors get around in
an over a dozen languages. So we
are are we are. We are. We are
optimistically ready and we know
now that all of our field teams
will be able to adapt to
changing circumstances. So this
is a really fantastic time to be
in san francisco given the
number of activities that will
be going on. This is not the
best time to be driving in san
francisco, so please do take
caltrain or bart or the ferries
or muni in order to get around
the next topic. I'm sure you've
also seen in the news is the
california department of motor
vehicles suspended cruise
permits to operate autonomous
vehicles without safety drivers
in san francisco and the
california public utilities
commission followed up shortly
after that ruling in order. To
no longer permit cruise to
operate commercial service with
a safety driver. We do not yet
know what conditions these dmv
or cpuc will place on cruise and
what it will take for their
permits to be reinstated. But we
are tracking closely. We also
continue to believe that
autonomous vehicles have the
potential to produce significant
benefits for the transportation
system, particularly around
safety. But this confirms our
belief that autonomous vehicles
need to meet very, very specific
safety thresholds in order to be
granted the ability to expand
incrementally by demonstrating
that they can operate safely
under all conditions before
being granted limitless
expansion rights on on. Next up,
I want to talk about state
funding, distribution of on
OCTOBER 25th, the metropolitan
transportation commission staff
presented their recommendations
for allocating. The $1.1 billion
that was allocated by the state
government for additional
transit relief. We are grateful
that the mtc staff
recommendation is for the sfmta
to receive more money than we
were expecting. Following upon
the state's guidance in order to
prioritize need and ridership in
the distribution of that
funding. As you know, the sfmta
carries about. 47% of all
transit riders in the nine
county bay area. The this money
is very, very welcome. It,
however, does not completely
close our fiscal cliff
situation, but rather postpones
the need to cut muni service
into 2026. While we continue to
work on identifying additional
revenue sources to close the gap
and ideally to get on the ballot
in NOVEMBER of 2026, there is a
whole lot more that we are
collaborating with our other
transit agencies, mtc and the
state legislature on as well. In
order to bring all the region's
transit operators into
integrated service and to make
sure that we're able to find a
path out of our fiscal situation
. The next topic is also related
to mtc, also on OCTOBER 24th,
mtc awarded an additional $16
million for bay wheels bike
share for e-bike expansion. As
you well know, e-bikes are a
miraculous tool for san
francisco, effectively making
our very hilly city flat. For
people who ride bikes. About 80%
of the region wide bay wheels
program trips are trips in san
francisco. And with this
investment at bay wheels prices
will be able to go down both the
annual and monthly membership
fees will be reduced and the per
minute fees will also be reduced
while we expand the e-bike
e-bike fleet throughout san
francisco. Next up, we are very
glad to announce that last week
we hosted a pretty interesting
and significant international
conference at the uitp, which is
the international association of
public transit had its 39th
annual trolley bus meeting here
in san francisco. More than 45
visitors from around the globe.
Agencies that operate electric
trolley busses from several
different continents came here
to share their experiences and
also to learn from us. I'm
particularly proud to point out
at the sfmta is bob and carter
who is here. Bob and has been
leading our electric bus
program. And more important, he
has been coordinating with the
other four remaining electric
trolley bus operator in north
america in order to ensure a
strong manufacturing market as
well as shared learning among
our agencies in many ways, for
cities like san francisco,
seattle and vancouver that have
really clean, low cost
hydropower, electricity and
steep hills, the trolley bus is
the perfect vehicle. Our san
francisco trolley busses pull
power directly from hetch hetchy
into power fall hill climbing
engines that don't require that
we carry two tons of batteries
up and down our hills. And so
we're glad for the opportunity
in order to continue to invest
in our trolley bus system. So
this north american or this
global conference, we are able
to show off all of our
facilities to people around the
world. We are also proud to
announce that our own chief
maintenance officer, charles
drain, was elected chair of the
international trolley bus
committee and it gave us
interesting practice hosting a
small but complex event for
which I really want to thank my
chief of staff, victoria wise.
Next up, I want to also
celebrate that on OCTOBER 23rd
and 26, our office of racial
equity and belonging hosted a
community connections racial
equity event at the southeast
community center in the bayview.
This was done in collaboration
with several other city
departments welcoming young
residents and any members of the
public to understand and how to
build skills, tools, how to
network, how to increase access
to city jobs and services,
including how youth can engage
with the city. We had more than
90 people in attendance for a
whole variety of panel topic
events and find me. I want to
show a fantastic little video
that the team put together in
honor of the bus rodeo that was
held on OCTOBER 28th at the cow
palace. This is a annual event
that was suspended during covid,
and we're so glad is back. We
had our transit operators
navigate a very, very
challenging and complex course
out in the parking lot and you
can play the video. Oh, but it's
just music. All right. All right
. Our transit operators
navigated a very complex course.
Our maintenance officers
competed in a whole variety of
technical events where they had
to solve problems with engines
in our parking control officers
competed in their three wheeled
gopher vehicles, navigating
tight timed courses while having
their colleagues yell at them.
And very importantly, director.
So got behind the wheel of a bus
and the orange cones who are
sacrificed for her experience,
I'm sure will will be forever
mourned. We're very proud to
announce as well that the first
place winner of the operator
event, mohamed ahmed and the
maintainers event, austin, you
are. There she is. We'll be
representing the sfmta at the
international rodeo in APRIL
2024. In portland, oregon.
Congratulations as well to our
second place managers. Winner
director lydia. Lydia so, lydia,
did you want to add anything?
Well, thank you very much. I
love that video to be precise.
I, I think I spare the orange
cone, but the barrels were
sacrificed, you know, really
miserable alley. But I was
really. I wanted to say, I. I
have tremendous respect and also
the patience agents that my
teacher, katrina brown, taught
me. And also everybody around
those cones and barrels were
really carefully making sure
that they might need to adjust
it. As I moved along. And it was
great. I love that experience
because it does enlighten me a
deeper hands on understand
taking on these challenges that
our operators and our mechanics
face every day, pulling up and
parallel park in every stop that
you're within that 12in to the
curb is not easy, man. I got to
tell you, I think I was two feet
away, so it was it was a really
good experience. And thank you
for everyone's patience with me
that day. I think I took I don't
know what I did. I don't know
how I did. But I really
appreciate that. And I think
that I have the honor to meet
the only asian american female
mechanics who actually win the
award. And you see her on the
slide. It was just melted in my
heart to see, you know, women.
We can do it. It's really hard
core doing the mechanics work
and I also met one of the
longest standing operators,
staff and her his number is like
three digits. So I think he
started working for muni before
I was born. So and this is
really echoing what our you want
to call him director yukito. He
said that we have so many muni
operators and our staff actually
being in our agency for over
many, many decades and they are
they are the machine and they
are the reason why we keep san
francisco going. So I have a lot
deeper understanding in all
these cases as susan in the
future might be bringing up to
me. And I have a deeper
understanding of what they are
about. Okay, thank you. I take
up a lot of air time. Um, I like
to also take this opportunity to
thank you, our director, jeff
tomlin, and also our staff who
had been basically really. They
try all they can and do the best
they can to work with our secret
service and work with our
chinatown leadership and our
chinatown. Three supervisor, our
board PRESIDENT Aaron peskin,
and also a lot of over a dozen
of key stakeholders for
chinatown merchants and
community groups. We had
conducted numerous meetings and
communication is key and I
really appreciate everyone under
the leadership of jeff tomlin.
Also, I wanted to give a shout
out to joel ramos, tony
henderson, ian naimo rogerson,
jesse lane, lulu phillips,
luciano. These are the team that
actually bridge the gap between
our language barrier to a lot of
chinese communities, not just
within chinatown, but the ones
that actually goes to chinatown
that that they are really,
really worried about. If they
can will be blocked. So I'm
really appreciate it. And on
behalf of our community, I
really wanted to say thank you
to our agency and these
dedicated staff. Thank you. Are
there other questions from my
colleagues on the director's
report or comments? Director
hemminger thank you, MADAM
Chair. Jeff I wanted to ask you
about two numbers in your report
. The first one has to do with
the ongoing saga of the fiscal
cliff and I believe you cited a
date of 2026, which is as a
result of getting more revenue
than you expected from mtc. We
could sort of push the envelope
out that far. Yes, but not
without risk, as will be
discussing at length in the
upcoming budget workshop. One of
the challenges that we face is
the question about the
likelihood of winning
significant new operating
funding at the ballot in
NOVEMBER of 26. So if we're
highly confident that we're
going to win there, then we can
keep, maintain gaining this
level of service s under the
expectation that we can find
something to cover that one year
gap. But if there's a risk of
not winning significant new
operating funding at the ballot,
then it changes the risk
equation significantly about
when we would need to start
trimming service s in order to
live under the resources that we
have today. I mean, candidly, I
don't think there can be much
doubt that there's significant
risk that we can't pass a
measure such as that. It would
be unprecedented to do so in the
bay area or probably anywhere
else. I'm trying to get a
clearer picture of the variables
that are driving this. And
obviously one of them is we lost
ridership ship, which means we
lost fare revenue during the
pandemic. Our ridership though,
is back up in the 70% range,
isn't it? It's just below 70.
And our fare revenue lags behind
that by about 10. And then
there's the general fund and is
that the bigger thing we need to
worry about for example, I mean,
with two more years under our
belt, do we get over 70? Do we
get up to 80? What's your
forecast there? So the
expectation for the general fund
is a decline in general fund
resources, both in real dollars,
but particularly compared to how
our operating expenses are
rising. So both are a threat.
And again, these will be numbers
that we will be presenting to
you in great detail soon. In
fact, we've been talking about
how, how, how to present this
complexity in a way that is
understandable, not only to you
all as experts, but also to the
general public. Well, and I know
we've gone back and forth a
little bit about the
nomenclature we use to describe
this. But I mean, my experience
has been that transit has always
lived hand-to-mouth and there's
always been an operating
shortfall to deal with.
Obviously, nothing as severe as
this. So I don't want to
minimize the challenge we're
facing, but I think it's
important to show people in the
context of a system that has
always required heavy subsidy
and always somehow finds a way
to make things work. We've got a
challenge on top of that, but
it's not as if this industry or
this system is unused to
challenges. It's sort of lived
in a challenging budget
environment for most of its life
. That is right. However one of
the things that we are trying to
do is to not gut maintenance.
This in order to balance our
books. So the revenue shortfalls
that we have faced in the past,
we have papered over by gutting
maintenance and therefore
degrading the quality of service
over time. We are trying to
reverse that and actually invest
in proper maintenance of the
system. Um, I believe that the
public has responded very
strongly to our emphasis on
particularly cleanliness and
reliability. And so I don't want
to get back into a cycle of
gutting maintenance in order to
pay for, oh no, we certainly
don't. And I'll tell you
personally, I really have not
seen the system in as good a
shape as it is for a long time.
Now, part of that is we don't
have as many crowds and we'd
like to fix that problem. But
but I think you're to be
commended for holding the line
on that. And I know we and
others can be tempted to say,
oh, just this one little new
operating expense. Yes. And so I
appreciate that. And I'll save
the rest of my questions for the
workshop, which is going to be
when julie, the board workshop,
I believe it's JANUARY 30th.
Okay. Thank you. And the second
question is, I hope a lot
shorter both the question and
the answer. Maybe about
bikeshare. And here I forgot the
number. What you said, how much
of the bikeshare patty ronage is
in san francisco? More than 80%
of the region. Wide bay wheels
trips are in san francisco. And
look, I would expect it to be
the lion's share, but. But do
you have a sense and evaluation
about why oakland and san jose
aren't doing better? I mean,
it's partly land use and it's
partly transportation in san
francisco has significantly
higher density and therefore
vastly more people within
walking distance of a bikeshare
station. And in addition, the
investments that we've made in
in bike infrastructure in our
neighborhoods is also paying
off. You know, while we MAY have
lost commuter bike riders like
we've lost commuter transit
riders, those trips have
significantly increased in san
francisco neighborhoods, which
is why we're committed to
continuing those investments
through our active community
strategy. Well, and as you
pointed out, I mean, the fact
that electric bikes sort of
flatten the hills of san
francisco, san jose's already
flat. So we're sort of giving
ourselves another advantage by
change, changing our geography
and I sure hope the debate that
we're going to have about the
richmond-san rafael bridge,
which takes that into account
because there it's as if we're
going to be pedaling across the
bridge and in many respects,
it'll be a different kind of
rider experience. Thank you,
MADAM Chair. Thank you. Other
colleagues, do you have any
questions on the director's
report? Okay. Seeing none, we
will open to a public comment on
the items covered in the
director's report. For anyone in
the room. Good afternoon. I keep
maggie glasses. I'm a bit tired.
Uh I do not think this is the
future what you're talking
about. I'm sorry. Because the
future you see is to make
everybody happy. So so it means
that bike. Yes. Yes. Okay, fine.
We can use bikes. But, you know,
san francisco is not hamsterdam.
It's not so it's pretty clear
that pushing this agenda for
bikes is to limit the ability
for people to move because then
you can have you have limited
staff, you can put on your bike.
So since the future is about no
more weaponization of anything,
including community action, like
the phone you see, you have to
work for that. I don't know how
to put it. I'm sorry. I'm like
hands on decks. For example, in
the bus you can put jokes
instead of bad harassment is
unacceptable. Yes, we know that.
But so don't harass people with
that push a joke. I don't know.
I've got one here. What's the
difference between a surgeon
wearing a mask and somebody
else? I don't know. It's a fun
joke to me. I'm sorry, guys. I
don't want to be the bad guy
coming or giving you bad news.
But what you're talking about is
not the future. I guarantee you.
Thank you. Next speaker, please.
Good afternoon, directors. Is
director tomlin. I'm mark
gleason. I'm here speaking on
behalf of teamsters joint
council seven and our affiliates
and our coalition partners about
the issue around autonomous
vehicles, which was reported
this year. Our trade union
partners have been in the
forefront of the call for safety
regulations, regulations of
autonomous vehicles.
Unfortunately and tragically, a
number of incidents this year
have occurred that alarms city
residents alarm first
responders. And finally, the
department of motor vehicles,
which is charged with ultimate
regulatory oversight of av
cruise, has now been shut down
by the dmv as reported, the
behavior of the other prominent
operator, waymo unfortunately
resulted in the death of a dog
earlier this year. We applaud
city attorney david chu for
taking the lead on this issue,
challenging the state decision
that allowed for this experiment
with street safety to be foisted
upon metropolitan residents,
metropolitan residents
throughout california. Indeed
the mayor of los angeles and
other prominent elected
officials are following our city
attorney's lead and calling out
the dangerous aspects of tech
experimentation on our roadways.
Under the circumstances. Av
experimentation on our streets
does not align with this
agency's core values in our
opinion, including the
improvement expansion and
resource retention of public
transit, diverse agencies and
departments of our city are
aligning with the leadership of
our elected representatives in
questioning and challenging the
driverless autonomous experiment
happening on our streets. We
strongly urge the mta mta to
join our city's leadership and
essential agencies in this
effort. Thank you. Thank you.
next speaker, please. Hi, stacy
randecker. Wow, what a fun, fun
meeting. So I'll go backwards. I
will. Thanks to the teamsters
for highlighting that the issue
is not actually a safety issue.
It's a labor issue. That is what
is at heart here. And I wish
that the agency would be more
broad minded, especially when I
see this kick ass mechanic over
here. We will need we have so
many jobs to do, no matter about
who's doing the driving. And we
need this city to be safer for
the and we need to not pay out
so much in lawsuits for what has
happened through injury or death
due to our muni drivers. Apec
wayfinding. I'm just hoping that
and I would say this to every
city agency that's all that's
getting all cleaned up for our
guests and stuff is just to take
some of it and make sure that we
do it for our own as well that
are still here after the event,
that we have it clean and
wonderful and people able to
find their way and make it easy
to take transit at the
bikeshare. I'm thrilled that
we'll be finally getting more
money and as a very frequent
rider throughout the bay area, I
would say that everyone drives
in san jose and both the
maintenance of the classic bikes
the non electric bikes because
they haven't had electric bikes
in those markets. It makes them
like very less attractive to
take. And then the trolley
busses. I'm so glad that we're
sort of coming around on trolley
busses. It's a much you said it
beautifully director tomlin like
that is the way it is the most
efficient thing that we are
getting this beautiful renewable
power. And it's we don't need
the big batteries. So yay, I'm
glad we're on the bus. Thanks
thank you. Next speaker, please.
Good afternoon. My name is pete
wilson. I'm executive vice
PRESIDENT For local 250. Lydia
congratulations. Katrina is an
excellent coach, but just a
little bit of warning. I know we
are looking for operators. If
you come and you pull two feet
away from the curb, you will get
written up. So you have to
practice that. Okay director
tomlin, it's going to be quite
the challenge this next week
with all these people come. I've
driven one night I drove the one
california and PRESIDENT Obama
was in town, of course, staying
at the fairmont. And so we had
to reroute and go around and do
all that. You're having. It's
going to be like 20 presidents
coming in and reroutes and all
that. And what I'm asking as my
way over here from flynn
division, I saw an inspector
sitting in the truck watching
probably the nine and the 1414
go by and I'm like, what are
they doing? I wonder, sitting in
that truck checking times, I
know our computers can check
their times. So one thing that I
didn't get that much when I was
operating is very many
inspectors coming up and saying,
hey, do you need some help? Is
there any way I can help you?
What's going on? And I
understand that it's stressful
time, probably a stressful time
for you, even though you seem to
handle stress pretty well.
Stressful time for the managers,
supervisors and everybody. I'm
just asking for patience, you
know, I'm asking for the
supervisors just because
somebody's 20 minutes late, half
an hour late, you know, your
team, the schedule is probably a
great job of trying to adapt the
schedules and we don't know what
it's going to be like. We
haven't had it since 1945, and
that was 1945. So I would just
appreciate if you could pass it
on down and julie could pass it
on down to people. Just please
be patient. It's going to be
it's going to be crazy. So thank
you. Thank you. Next speaker.
Hi, board members. Luke
bornheimer related to the cruise
disaster. I would love to just
pass on a comment in case the
ceo of cruise, kyle voight, is
listening. Gm board members. Gm
is the parent company of cruise
or other venture capitalists who
are investing in autonomous
vehicles. We have an underfunded
transportation agency and rather
than figuratively be lighting
money on fire to fund cruise,
they could help fund sfmta. So I
would encourage those venture
capitalists to look at sfmta in
the city and maybe invest that
money to help us build a better
transportation system. Thank you
. Thank you. Are there any other
speakers in the room? This is
for the directors report
comments on items in the
director's report item seven.
Okay seeing none, please open
the remote at this time. We'll
move to remote public comment
not to exceed a total time of
ten minutes. Members of the
public wishing to comment should
dial star three to enter the
queue. Each speaker will have
two minutes. Moderator first
speaker. This is herbert weiner.
My concern is, is that we have
more trolleys because because
trolleys has been playing out
are good system of
transportation and that should
the trolley should also reflect
the density of the city so that
should be part and parcel of
adding more busses to the fleet.
Thank you. Thank you. Next
speaker. Hello good afternoon.
This is barry toronto. I just
want to first say that it was a
really nice tribute and honor
that you gave to manny yaqoob
for his service and for the
ideas he brought to the board.
So thank you for the how you
handled his departure. I want to
talk about apec. I think it's
important that you you keep the
taxi staff informed and educated
on on what's happening and to
create and to and to let us know
where you're going to put the
temporary taxi zones in a timely
manner and to have them also
there's a problem. 801 howard
and all the housing behind and
on the south of moscone center
has disabled people. So the
least you could do is vet the
most of the ramp drivers so that
they have access to these
buildings. So people in
wheelchairs should not be put
out because of this event. So I
beg you to make sure that the
ramp taxis have access to these
buildings that house disabled
people within the closed off
area. Thank you very much. Thank
you. No additional speakers.
Okay. Close public comment.
Please call the next item places
you on. Item number eight, the
citizens advisory council
report. We have no report that
places you on item number nine.
General public comment. Members
of the public MAY address the
board of directors or on matters
that are within the board's
jurisdiction, but not on today's
calendar. And I do have some
speaker cards and anthony
ballester, fred m mark gleason.
MADAM Chair, directors director
tomlin, my name is anthony
ballester. I am PRESIDENT Of
transport workers union local
250, a and I the first thing I
want to say that I work with
julie very well and work with
jeff very well and of course
there are things that we
disagree with and that's why I'm
here. Of course, I know that you
received the emails. I've sent
and I appreciate that. And I
know you read them so most
important thing about I'm here
is about senior operators like
director solis said, that
they've been here for 15, 20, 25
years, 30 years. Our members
don't go on vacation for 2 or 3
years, four years at a time. So
when they do have an opportunity
to go on vacation, they go for
six, seven, eight weeks. Now the
agency is holding them down just
two, four weeks after being
here, 15, 20 years. That's just
disrespectful. And it's always
been past practice and there's
no limit on how many weeks can
be taken. And city charter.
Eight for 40 or and our in our
mou. Section 13.5 paragraph 170.
And they agency did not bargain
in good faith and they've
continued this practice for
quite a while. You know, I don't
mean any disrespect to julie or
jeff, but mid-level management
are always telling us what
they're going to do. And when we
want to change something, they
don't allow us. And this is the
way management is going to act.
why are we going through
contract negotiations? We're
going to have a hard time. So
that's the first thing I want to
do. I want to our senior
operators to take time to go
back to home country, whether
it's china or india. You know,
they need that time. So I like
that change. One more other
thing, another email that I sent
is regarding this policy about
supervisors looking into bags,
purses. I mean, are you going to
allow us managers go to a
woman's purse and look at her
feminine hygiene products just
because they want to check her
phone? Just trust them. Their
phone is off and you know, and
it's stowed. You know, you don't
got to go into women's property
and look at a bag or even a
gentleman's property. This is
wrong. So I want to kill this
before it gets going. Thank you.
Thank you. Thanks for your
sharing your comments. Next
speaker, please. Hello thank you
so much for allowing my public
comment. I have a son at lowell
high school and on our listserv
we started talking about
somebody said, has anybody else
had problems, problems with the
bus, skipping them on the 48. We
are at the end of the 48, so we
don't have problems with the bus
skipping us. But we have a
problem that it takes an hour
and a half or maybe an hour and
45 minutes to get to school. All
the 48 also goes to soda. It
goes to lincoln. It's skipping
students on the way to school.
It's taking 20, 30 minutes
longer than it's supposed to.
When this came up, people said,
oh, I don't have that on the 48,
but I've got it on the 23. I've
got it on the 28, I've got it on
the 44. So who do we want to get
to? How do we want our students
to get to school? Obviously we
want them to take the bus making
that bus reliable, making it get
there on time, make making it
have space for these students.
It's critical and we would be
happy. A bunch of parents from
lowell would be happy to work
with you guys. We also know
parents at soda and lincoln and
other schools and come up with a
list of routes that need
attention on and we'd love to
help you make this better for
our students. Thank you. If I
MAY, I usually don't address the
audience. So this is a very
important issue to us. We have
all of the data on our crowding
and performance. One of the most
important things that we all
could do together is to work
with the school district to
stagger school, start times.
This has been one of our
greatest challenges, and our
transit team is here who've been
trying to work with the school
district so far without success,
as I hope you know, we are in
the worst financial crisis in
our agency's history. We
reallocated much of our downtown
service to augment service to
school, but now we need help
with scheduling because we have
a we have a problem of success
with an unprecedented number of
kids using muni in order to get
to school, which is great. It is
problematic that they all need
to get to school at exactly the
same time. Right. I mean, the
they're the middle schools. Are
we can't really engage in a okay
sorry. Well yeah. Anyway I'm
happy to work with you guys
about it. Thank you for raising
that issue. Next speaker please.
I also have a speaker card for
stacy randecker. I'm one of
those little moms to the. Yeah,
so whatever we can do, I know
that there will be other people
online also addressing this. But
what it really for me is I know
that transit is our first
priority here. We say it all the
time. We say we're a transit
first city, but I'd really like
us to think about when we're
making decisions about how
people get around and that we
take into consideration all the
principles that that are transit
first principles and that we let
walking and biking also be
viable options. I am so
concerned about all of the
decisions that are made that are
to preserve parking to not annoy
motorists, to make sure that
everybody is okay and they get
to park for free and it's just
it's mind blowing when it is
juxtaposed with the toll that is
taken in injuries in
intimidation, in deaths on our
streets of pedestrians, people
just walking on the sidewalk and
they're mowed down, people
wanting. I can't let my 16 year
old son I have to think about
him getting a driver's license.
I don't want him to. But it is
just not safe enough for him to
bike. We have to do better. We
have to make this. We have to
actually give the lanes, give
the space, give the budget to
making transit sing, to making
biking and option so that we
keep and that we make it harder
for drivers. I'm sorry, there's
no other way around it. And our
city needs it. Our planet needs
it. Please do what you can to
really be transit first. Thank
you. Thank you. Are there other
speakers in the room for general
public comment? I do have more
speaker cards. Yeah. Lucy wang.
Lee chen li. Jenny wendy liu.
Lee chung. Josephine it's okay,
sir. You can go ahead. Okay I
wasn't quite sure how this
works. It's my first time here
at this board meeting. I'm fred
mu
lheim. I'm a 50 year resident
of the city and a long term
advocate community advocate for
city college of san francisco. I
love muni. I use it every day.
It takes me reliably where I
need to go. I love the van ness
carter improvements and I'm
always behind getting vehicles
off the streets when it makes
sense. I'm here to share
concerns about the frida kahlo
quick build project with you
that I'm hearing from all the
constituents at city college and
from many surrounding
neighborhoods. One, they feel
that the project is going ahead
way too fast and that their
inputs haven't been sought out
or listened to, particularly on
the side of the college, which
is now developing the new steam
building. The diego rivera
theater is going to be going in
and the college is going to be
losing 1100 spaces of parking
with the balboa reservoir
project. It's kind of the
elephant in the room is that
it's a commuter school. Some of
the students have to drive to
get there. So we have to provide
some parking for them. If you
are and it's been said, well,
it's only 50 parking spaces that
are going to go away. But those
are parking spaces that turn
over for multiple times a day.
And students don't go there
every day of the week. So it's
affecting taking educational
opportunity away from hundreds
of students. We also have
concerns about not increased
backup on frida kahlo way by
moving bus stops from the curb
into bus islands where the
busses will be in the main
traffic lane and traffic will
have to stop behind them. We
also feel that is your time.
Okay, thank you. There are many
points and thank you for your
time and interest. Okay thank
you for your comment. Next
speaker, please. Hello. Hello
english name not real, but so
you man. Hey, they they do. We
need a translation pension was
fun. Pink sing a fun song. I
don't know what you have with my
yeah the need to can't move on
being the puppeteer ho minfong
pain so you know the family who
city then I come shanghai dong
what is some fancy bank
translate you you sang so you
hey they they pay teng wine day
ha you tomei ho tong hoi pong de
to lopunny fong bindi my ya hui
tai sang gam hey dang dong what
they sing thank you. I'm sorry,
director. We didn't receive a
request for translation services
today. However, if we continue
the comment and receive it, I
can come back and provide you
notes. After this meeting. Thank
you. Next speaker, please. Hi my
name is wendy. But my english is
so-so. I can just a little bit.
Okay my family with live
together when we go grocery
shopping, we buy a lot of food
for the week. We can do it with
our car. I feel many business
trips have removed parking for
many reasons and now I can find
parking to do basic grocery
shopping, eat quickly and do
housework for my family. Peace
at angle parking and parking.
Lala and moon bike parking on
the sidewalk. Thank you so much.
Thank you. Thank you. I mean,
you can speak cantonese or
mandarin if you would like to
say that again in your language,
wherever this one is. Oh leo yi
dongfanghong manor. You song.
Okay. Good afternoon. My name is
li chen wei. I live chinatown. I
say about the bus in the car.
Chinatown. Very busy sometimes
my son ask me to check the
doctor. The cartoon, the
chinatown tuna la tuna la half
hour. Can I find the parking
time? That's it. One hour. Very
terrible. I hope so. Yeah. Open
a lot there. And parking. Thank
you very much. Thank you. Next
speaker, please. No more golf.
Violin, town hall. I li chen.
Go, tiger chicken. Nathan chen
by parker mantyke go there like
a cartoon. Cartoon go, go. Yo
bang chow. Cao this chair. Holy
cow. My job for so you. Wanna
lock your your chen yi xiang you
go hi. Come to hai fong ping.
Hey, tiger. Hey. Morning to you
hoy hong sotong the chair.
Welcome back. Chair pong ping
all day. Siong bang, bang yun.
Thank you. Thank you. Any other
speakers in the room for general
public comment. Uh no. No, man
hi, wendy. Go. Hi, lady. Go
gaga. Thank you. Gao. Hong kong.
Go hong kong. Go, go, go, go,
go, go! Hi yi gong gao. Why do
you see halo? Come in. Go, go.
Hi I mean, go, go. Second face.
Hi john. Sega. Go we go. Hi. We
zheng zheng, zhao hui jerome
john. See? Come yao hong zhong.
yao. Yao yao. Go. Sup ho I say
sup. Okay hi, yi jin hyuk cheng
chin zhao. Hi. Hi. Hi. You go.
What every other guy. Hi zhong.
Hi guy. Zhou zheng. Yang hong
zhong. Yao gotti. Gong hong
gallo bin. Why are how see jim
yong yong gong. Gong. Gong.
Gong, gong. Parking how are you?
John thomas there you go. Go.
Swimming. Although they go a
sidewalk. Although move having
or being. Although team parking
although thank you. Next speaker
please. This is non agenda items
general public comment. Right.
Thank you so much. My name is
rex ridgeway. I am with abraham
lincoln high school and about an
hour and a half ago our
assistant principal sent an
email and I'll just quickly read
it. I am reaching out to you as
one of the assistant principals
of abraham lincoln high school.
I have ceased. Director
ridgeway, ask me the other
assistant principal, jordan
lewis, and forwarding this
message that I sent to engardio
office regarding the frustrating
that continues with the 48. Not
only is the 48 continuing to
pass up our kids, but I myself
was a student. Have been passed
up so I won't read read it
basically I met with him today.
They asked me if I could rush
down here, at least be a face
again. You've seen me before and
I know you can't add a bus, but
maybe a longer bus. But we're
really, really struggling with
this. The term is pass ups and
we're continuing to deal with
them. Any help would be really
appreciated. So that's why I'm
here. Thank you. Thank you for
flagging. Someone else raised
that today. And I believe our
staff were able to talk to them
in the hallway. So I don't know
if director kirshbaum or kennedy
are here, but we can maybe have
them connect with you as well.
Next speaker, please. Hi, my
name is julia toscano and I'm
here to talk about the parking
restrictions in nearby high sfsu
san francisco state university.
So I, as a student of san
francisco state university, I
live in the parkmerced
apartments right across the
street, and I have $5,000 worth
of parking citations because I
was unsuccessfully able to
receive a permit from the city
so I could park in front of my
own home. They required a
utility bill, which is split
between my roommates, so it's
not in my name. I offered a
proof of address from the post
office I was offering other
various forms of proof of
address, but it was denied my by
a I think, $5,000 just for
parking in front of my own home
as a student is just ridiculous.
It's outrageous. The parking
restrictions in san francisco
just to go to school, to go to
the doctor, to go grocery
shopping, to do normal daily
life things, you have to pay pay
so much just to park and just to
live here in the city. And I was
on my way to the hospital all
last week and I was pulled over
in tenderloin between hyde and
larkin, the highest homeless and
population in crime in the
entire city by chp. And they
towed my car right then and
there. So I no longer have a car
. And it's all because of these
outrageous parking restrictions.
So that's all I came here to
speak on today. Thank you for
sharing your experience. Next
speaker, please. Hi. My name is
jenny and I drive my car every
day. We're living in san
francisco and somehow every
house on my block has 3 to 4
cars. So parking in front of my
own house is difficult. Almost
every day, especially on sunday,
when everybody is home. I'm just
asking for maybe more side angle
parking. Like I feel like a spot
in the big sunset streets could
fit like 2 or 3 side angled or
back in parking and I feel like
that would be very helpful to
those of us who drive. Thank you
. Thank you. Next speaker,
please. Hello again. My name is
pete wilson, local 258. We
represent fare inspectors. We
are concerned about the way the
fare inspectors are being
treated. I had some talking to
some shop stewards for fare
inspectors and they were asked
by their managers and
supervisors to do something they
were concerned about what was
happening. So I asked the
manager to step outside the
manager and supervisor stepped
outside. I talked to them. I
said, better to comply and not
get written up for
insubordination and we'll talk
about it later. We did then they
had a hearing and had the
question the supervisor asked is
, what did your supervisor or
excuse me, what did your union
representative, pete wilson, say
to you to have you comply? And
that is illegal under the myers
milius? Brown act. They should
not be interfering with union
work. The other thing is it just
came out that they are telling
fare inspectors that they can
never sit on a bus. The rule is
if they're on a bus and people
are sitting down and they need
seats, they can't sit. They've
always complied with that. But
now they're telling them they
can never sit on a bus. So we're
talking 2.5 hours straight. I
would suggest that some of you
stand up every once in a while
and move around. It's good, but
you also shouldn't be standing
for hours straight. So I just
think that what's going on there
is very sad, as anthony
ballester was talking earlier,
the sfmta is forcing a change
against our contract, saying
that people and by the way,
lydia, you were speaking I think
you said yeah, you were maybe
talking about rafael cabrera,
who's a very he's number three.
He's a cable car operator. He's
a senior operator. That guy can
have eight, ten weeks and he can
go take it all. At one time they
were saying, well, the newer
operators cannot. There are
times that they can't sign up
for vacation. So I asked where
that data was and the manager
said, well, I can't give you
that data. It's just what I've
heard here is the documentation
that proves that every single
operator has an opportunity.
They just don't have the
opportunity to sign up for the
weeks that they want your time.
Here is the letter that they
wrote us, and I've got the
untruths written on here. You
can enjoy that next speaker,
please. Dear commissioners and
director, this is josephine.
Very glad to be here for the
very first time. We represent
that immigrants multi generation
family, the working poor
majority of people that living
in and outside of chinatown in
the chinese community, we need
cars to really make a difference
in our life. We used to stay in
sros in chinatown, very crappy
housing situation for people
living in a room without toilets
and without kitchen. But with a
car, we are able to move to a
further out neighborhoods that
we can get access to better
schools, better work, and we can
start being self employed.
Little business people, all
handyman bringing tools with our
cars, starting to have a start,
having a contracting business
and other businesses that will
make us self sufficient. The car
. Nowadays roles are not open
and gray highway is closed for
commute. It adds a lot of burden
to our community and also
parkings are being taken away by
many different reasons. Some are
necessary, but some like the
bike rental rack, can totally be
put on wider sidewalk in a 45
degrees. We can definitely use
more technology to ensure
transit and person walker
safety. We can be walker and bus
people. Any day, not just some
day. Some people will always
take bus and some people will
always drive. We are everything,
every other day, every day. So
don't make us pit each other
against each other. Let's make
sure that we bring in technology
to ensure safety, cross walks
overhead, flash lights for
people walking across, and other
technology to ensure walkers
safety, biker safety and transit
safety. We can do all for
everyone. We don't have to
choose and pick whom we serve.
Thank you so much. Thank you.
Next speaker, please. Hey board
members. Luke bornheimer have a
few things I want to touch upon
today. First, no turn on red as
you all know, last year we had
39 roadway deaths in our city.
Next year is the end of our
vision. Zero goal. No turn on
red is proven to work. Proven to
make streets safer and can be
approved immediately and
implemented in an incremental
manner that prioritizes, for
example, high injury network
intersections, intersections
with large number of people
walking. Since your last
meeting, the mayor's disability
council voted unanimously to
support a citywide no turn on
red policy, adding to the board
of supervisors unanimous
approval of a non-binding
resolution sent to you.
Unfortunately, you and mayor
breed are the only people with
power and authority who have not
commented on or voted on
approving a citywide policy. And
you are the only ones who can
actually make it happen. So I
encourage you to take that up as
soon as possible, ideally before
the end of the year. Next
valencia street. Many people,
including you, have talked about
the evaluation report that is
coming to you shortly.
Unfortunately, something that
has not been talked about is the
fact that crash and injury data
will not be included in that
because sftp and sfpd data is
lagged and the public doesn't
know that it that's a problem.
That's like one of the only
pieces of data that matters,
right? Is it safe? Our injuries
increased. That's a massive
problem. I don't know what to do
with that, but someone should
probably do something about that
. Staff have also not created a
detailed design for curbside
protected bike lanes between
15th and 19th, which would mean
that if you voted to remove the
center bikeway, it would have to
go back to paint only on
protected bike lanes. So I would
encourage you to urge staff to
create a detail design by the
time that evaluation report is
presented. Finally in the last
10s, laura taylor was killed on
the I-280 on ramp likely that
happened because there was not
good signage. She was riding a
bike on mta streets ended up on
a highway on ramp. Probably
won't count towards vision zero
numbers. It should. It's a
really tragic death. Thank you.
Thank you. Any other speakers in
the room for general public
comment? Seeing none, please
open the phones. Christine at
this time, we'll move to remote
public comment not to exceed a
total time of ten minutes.
Members of the public wishing to
comment should dial star three
to enter the queue. Each speaker
will have two minutes for
speaker. Speaker, you've been
unmuted. By moderator. Let's go
to the next speaker and come
back. This is herbert weiner.
One concern I definitely have is
there should be remote public
comment. Now sometimes abusive
language can be used on the
phone. At that point. They
should. The offensive speaker
should be cut off and stopped
from talking. The second concern
I have is also about the timely
bus service for lowland lincoln
high schools. I believe this can
be remedied by adding more
busses to that run and not
taking away from other runs. We
definitely need more busses to
reflect the need for public
service, and I think that this
is the main key. The leading bus
stop is not the solution. It's
basically having more busses to
the fleet. So these are comments
I have. I realize that you have
a budgetary crisis. You proclaim
a budgetary crisis, but I
believe that you still have room
enough to add more busses to the
fleet. Thank you. Thank you.
Next speaker. Hi this is adam in
soma. Um, first off, thanks for
still keeping public comment.
It's much appreciated. Not all
of us can get there in person,
but I wanted to focus on on
talking about street safety in
soma because we have a number of
super narrow alleys here in
soma, some of which are
overloaded with two way driving
as well as parking lanes and if
someone else had commented
earlier that the sfmta is
deathly afraid of removing
parking at and that causes
safety issues, we've been trying
to get sfmta to either remove
parking and or remove make a two
lane road one way so that cars
and trucks do not have to go up
on the sidewalk. But so far
we're going to keep trying. But
so far your organization has
refused to do either. And one of
the common comments that we've
gotten from engineers who come
out is that sfmta does not want
to remove parking spaces because
drivers will complain about it.
You should not be putting free
parking above the safety of
residents in a neighborhood who
walk and bike on local streets.
You know, cars do not pay for
parking and most of these
streets and you know, everyone
uses them. The other comment has
to do with the valencia bike
lane. We know it's not working
the constantly. Just this past
week yet another semi pickup
truck is using it as parking
cars go in and out of the center
of the bike lane. All the time.
If you're not going to bother
with enforcement, if you're not
going to bother putting up
concrete bollards that stop cars
and trucks from coming into the
bike lane, then rip it out. And
let's go to the protected bike
lane proposal that luke had
mentioned. We need to put safety
and usability above the
convenience of car drivers.
Thank you. Thank you. Next
speaker. Hi there, this is
susanna upton. First, I've long
awaited to say thank you to all
of those who advocated for free
muni for all our youth. Thank
you. Now we need to get our kids
to school on time. I'm here also
to talk about the 48. My kid is
routinely skipped by one, two
and sometimes 348 busses at 24th
and guerrero and at 24th and
mission. He routinely is tardy
for first period and this is a
really important year for our my
high schoolers to be on school
on time. Obviously some when
he's late we try to get him to
school by car. Obviously some
families cannot do this right.
And it contributes to our city
issues of students being truant.
I reached out to my school
community for suggestions, but
instead I heard the same stories
of kids being skipped in morning
commute on bus lines and see 23,
28, 29, 44 and seven. I'm here
too. I've I heard the board
earlier talk about some
suggestions on rotating start
times. This is something maybe
to think about, but not
achievable this year. We need
your help to make improvements
for our kids. Now for the 48,
how about an immediate 48
express? Maybe during morning
commute 30s one intermission
stop, maybe mission and 24th and
then no. And all in words right
now there's a big attendance
issue that the sfusd is working
on. Also bussing are getting our
kids on bus to school can really
help reduce traffic at our
school sites and surrounding
streets. Something that rotating
start time would not help with a
quick comment on the valencia
corridor is that it? Thank you.
Your time is up a quick okay.
Okay. Thank you. Next speaker.
We have no additional speakers.
Okay. With that, we will close
public comment and colleagues
and members of public. I
apologize. We did not have
translation services available.
Those are we recommend that
people request that 48 hours in
advance. There's a phone number
(415)!A646-4470. Anyone can
request language assistance. We
request two days in advance so
we can accommodate that request.
With that, please move to item
ten directors that places you on
item ten your consent calendar.
These items are considered to be
routine and will be acted upon
by a single vote unless a member
of the board or public wishes to
consider an item separately.
Item 10.1 requesting the
controller to a lot funds and to
draw warrants against such funds
available or will be available
in payment of the listed claims
against the sfmta. Those are
items 10.1 a and b item 10.2
approving various routine
parking and traffic
modifications and making an
environmental review findings.
And it's come to my attention
that item 10.2 a did not include
an address and so will be
removed and returned to you at a
future meeting. Today you will
be considering items 10.2 b
through d as listed in the
agenda item 10.3 authorizing the
director of transportation or
their designee to execute a
grant agreement in any
amendments to such grant
agreement with the california
department of transportation in
to receive approximately $1.3
million in discretionary funding
for the sfmta's embarcadero
mobility resilience plan. Item
10.4 author rising, the director
of transportation to approve
amendments to as needed
specialized training services
contracts. The first one
amendment number six to contract
number sf mta 1839a with moran
consulting to extend the
contract duration 15 months
beyond the contracts five year
term and to the contract amount
by $1 million for a not to
exceed amount of approximately
$3.8 million to a not exceed
amount of approximately $4.8
million. And amendment number
three to contract number sfmta.
To 1839b with z.Com to extend
the contract duration 15 months
beyond the contracts five year
term without increasing the not
to exceed amount of $3 million
an item 10.5 approving a reduced
roadway. Shared spaces closure
of hays street between gough and
octavia streets. 4 P.M. To 10
P.M. Each friday and 1 P.M. To
10 P.M. Each saturday from
NOVEMBER 10th, 2023 through
saturday, OCTOBER 19th, 2024.
Consistent with the sf board of
directors recommendation given
at the OCTOBER 17th, 2023 board
meeting, the application from
the hays valley merchants
council for roadway shared
spaces permit is to close hay
street between gough and octavia
streets friday from 4 P.M. To 10
P.M. Saturdays and sundays from
10 A.M. To 10 P.M. And making
environmental review findings.
That concludes your consent
calendar. Okay, colleagues,
unless there are clarifying
questions, I'd like to go to
public comment on the consent
calendar for anyone in the room.
I had a couple, but the hays
street. I don't know what to
say. Other than I think that it
should be closed 24 over seven
365 and so the merchants meager
ask to have all weekend long
should be granted and stripping
it down further is just it's
silly and it echoes it's much
like valencia and many other
merchant corridors we need to do
things for our city that help
our merchants and bringing in
cars just doesn't and then I was
really curious about the
embarcadero money. The report
made it sound like, hey, we are
getting free money and unless we
have money coming from somewhere
else, I'd really like to hear
more about what the money is
going to be used for. I mean, I
don't want to turn down free
money, but I care very much
about the embarcadero and think
that that's another place that
should not have cars. And so I'd
like to know what the money will
be spent on and that it will be
about planning what's best for
the embarcadero and yeah, I
can't remember, but thank you.
Thanks for your comments. Next
speaker, please. Good afternoon.
Alan barradell here. I want to
express my opposition to any
plan to close hays street for
more than one day a week. A one
day a week closure was already
it was already extensively
discussed and already agreed
upon. In fact, one day per week
was the recommendation of sfmta
staff. It should be clear why
something about the process,
something about the process
seems unfair. There should be a
fair process for sfmta
initiatives and policies that
can negatively impact a
neighborhood, and especially the
small businesses and the
residents there. And I'm
dumbfounded by what appears to
be sfmta's tone deaf steamroll
ing over residents and merchants
concerning concerns regarding
hayes valley street closures as
it reneges on earlier agreements
. I support hays street
residents and merchants in
stopping the sfmta and
supervisor preston from
reneging, reneging on this
agreement. For a limited said
the agreement was for a limited
hayes street closure and trying
to replace it with an unnest
necessary and unwanted multi day
closure or even worse, a
permanent 24 over seven street
closure. I urge the sfmta board
here that it must approve the
original single day programing
that was agreed upon based on
studies reviewed and
recommendations by the sfmta and
outreach to hays street
merchants at that time. Please
note hayes valley does not lack
open space. It's got a lot of
parks. We support traffic and
transportation plans for all
modes, all modes and with
unobstructed access to hayes
street business corridor for a
vibrant, accessible, a healthier
business. So thank you. Thank
you. Next speaker, please. Good
afternoon. Directors director
tomlin. My name is david
robinson. I'm a homeowner in
hayes valley and also a member
of the board of directors for
the hayes valley neighborhood
association, an obviously I am
here in support of the friday
night, saturday closure
continuance of the closure of
hayes street and the corridor
between golf and octavia. Also
supporting that staff look into
full time closure of hayes
street the restaurants and the
shops along that corridor are
benefit greatly. We represent
residents of hayes valley that
have overwhelmingly supported
continuing this. I think the
board was received many emails
in support of it and they have
overwhelmingly overwhelmingly
commented that that makes our
neighborhood even safer. And
more well used. And it is a
destination not only for
residents, for people from
throughout the city, if not from
throughout the state that visit
san francisco. They've made that
very clear. So I urge you to
support that. And then on down
the road have staff look at
continuing that on a 24/7 basis.
Thank you for your time. Thank
you. Next speaker, please. Good
afternoon. Board members and
director tumlin. My name is
robin leavitt. I'm a 30 year
resident of hayes valley and I'm
here to speak in support of item
10.5. The recommendation for
hayes street shared spaces on
fridays and saturdays, but also
directs your staff to design a
process to pedestrianize a
street. Since receiving sfmta
staff feedback at the OCTOBER
17th board meeting, the
community has committed to
making the hayes street shared
space a viable program with five
activation events and eight more
scheduled by the end of the
year. The opening of streets to
pedestrians and users other than
motorized vehicles is consistent
with san francisco's transit
first climate action and vision
zero goals as well as the
recommendations outlined in the
market. Octavia area plan, which
the city adopted in 2008. For
over three years, repurposed
hayes street has been a boon for
hayes valley residents, visitors
and merchants alike, providing
an oasis of calm and safety in a
neighborhood with some of the
worst air pollution levels in
the city and inundated with
traffic clogged arterial
streets, including oak fauci,
franklin golf and octavia
boulevard. For fairness dictates
that if our streets are going to
be to continue to serve as
traffic sewers in exchange the
community deserves traffic free
space as a respite from
pollution noise and the
perpetual threat of being hit by
motor vehicles. Please, please
approve the friday and saturday
schedule and direct sfmta staff
to design a process to
pedestrianize a street giving
our community a path to a 24
over seven on hayes street.
shared space. Thank you very
much for your consideration.
Thank you. Next speaker, please.
Hi my name is andrew steiner.
I'm here to ask to please
approve item 10.5 to continue
with the program on friday and
saturday for the hayes street
shared spaces and also instruct
mta staff to design a process to
pedestrianize a street. I
created a website called car
freezorg. We've gotten over 1300
signatures on it so far. We've
also gotten the endorsement of
the hayes valley neighborhood
association, hayes valley for
all the lower haight merchants
and neighbors association on
page slow street, the outer
sunset neighbors. And yesterday
we got an endorsement from the
sf symphony. This is a broad
coalition of merchants,
neighbors and organizations that
all support a fully
pedestrianized hayes street. All
we're asking for today are those
two particular days. The
feedback from sfmta staff at the
last meeting was to activate the
space more. As someone else said
, we've already scheduled 13
events between then and the end
of the year when I say we, I'm
not doing all of this. These are
independent orgs that are using
the space for the next five
fridays are already booked for
events. So I just want to point
out how important that evening
is for us. It's our busiest
evening and I really want to
thank you all for the discussion
you had three weeks ago to
amending it to allow us to
continue to use friday. So thank
you for all your work. Cheers
thank you. Next speaker, please.
Hi, my name is richard johnson
and I'm with a group called be
safe. And then also we have an
ongoing petition, citywide
petition, and that's the
petition fair. Hayes valley and
I'm here to bring up another
point of where it's interesting
that many of my neighbors and
friends are focusing on hayes
street. We have a car free
street that's been there since
the late 60s. It's called the
buchanan mall. And I think if
you're going to expand energy
that would be something to be
looking at. It's already car
free. It would actually do what
the merchants are saying along
hayes street to activate the
lower fillmore and the fillmore
district in general. But it's
been something that's been there
since the 70s. I have to say, as
someone who's a transit rider
and a pedestrian, I reach out to
you as the agency to really make
our neighborhood instead of
closing our streets, doing more
with the transit. I'm a regular
rider on the haight haight
street busses and to me it was
like the usual waiting to go to
an appointment at ucsf and had
to wait like 30 minutes for a
bus. And we were promised
greater transit with all the
development that that's come to
our neighborhood. And we're not
seeing that. So I'm saying that
you should follow the what your
staff had recommended and to
scale it back with certain
conditions and add not to go
forward with the two day and
definitely not to move forward
with studies to close off the
street. You should actually be
expanding your energy and kind
of teaming with the money that's
already been invested on the
buchanan mall to really that to
me could achieve everything that
everyone is asking. And it would
be a simple walk for people to
just walk over there and to do
something which I do on a
regular basis. I want to thank
you for your time and like I
say, I encourage you to follow
your staff report. Thank you,
director thomas speaker, please.
Okay. Thank you. That's your
time. Hi. Good afternoon. I'm
jennifer laska, the PRESIDENT Of
the hayes valley neighborhood
association. And I'm also here
on behalf of lloyd silverstein,
who couldn't be here, who's
PRESIDENT Of the hayes valley
merchants council, just to urge
you to vote yes on the consent
agenda item today for hayes
street. I think we had a robust
conversation last month and came
to a good compromise. So please
just stick with it and hope you
vote yes. Thank you. Thank you
for your comment. Any other
speakers in the room seeing
none. Please open the remote at
this time. We'll move to remote
public comment not to exceed a
total time of ten minutes.
Members of the public wishing to
comment should dial star three
to enter the queue. Each speaker
will have two minutes. Moderator
first speaker hi, good afternoon
. This is barry toronto. For
some reason my hand was lowered
during public comment and I
didn't get a chance to make
public comments. So, so thank
you for taking that away from
me. Just like you take it away.
My taxi stands in the city as
well by not having enforcement,
you could really make more money
for transit if you actually
actually had more pco's on
during the off hours and forcing
the illegal double parking and
the illegal parking that goes on
in the streets. I want to
address this regarding hayes
valley. Obviously, the closure
doesn't work for every business.
And even though man leaving
represented small business,
there's some some hypocrisy
going on here. If you care about
small business, then you should
you should do better outreach
and hear the concerns of the
small business people that don't
benefit from certain changes,
such as somebody put a the
rental bikes in the middle of
the block, taking away this this
businesses. Deliveries so he
didn't have a place for the
delivery to double park in the
bike lane so the thing is that
you you can't take care of
everybody's needs but you need
to listen to all members of the
community, not just a few,
because then they become
unintended consequences. Thank
you very much. Thank you. Next
speaker. Hi this is adam from
d6. I just wanted to call in
support of all of the hayes
valley residents who are
supporting the closure of hayes
street. I know here in some we
would love to do similar with
some of our streets. So it's the
kind of thing that makes a
neighborhood more viable, more
popular. And it's great to have
walkable, walkable streets and
walkable areas with restaurants
and businesses. San francisco
should see more of this across
the city. So I encourage you,
please do what the residents and
majority of business owners on
hayes are asking and close the
street as requested. Thank you.
thank you. Next speaker. Okay,
this is susanna upton. We need
more pedestrian space. So
pedestrianization of hayes seems
right to me. I have more
experience on valencia, which
really needs increased
pedestrian pathways. If hayes is
like valencia where I have to
walk in a single file, single
file with my walking partner,
that's just not right. We can't
we can't look into windows
together where we it's difficult
to have a conversation in my by
my senior mother in law is feels
rushed and pushed along on
valencia I just might be the
case for hayes as well and so
more pedestrian ization in our
city is welcomed by me. Thank
you. Thank you. We have no
additional callers. Okay thank
you. We'll close public comment
on the consent calendar.
Colleagues, MAY I have a motion
to move the items? Second,
second. Thank you. Please call
the roll on the motion to
approve the consent calendar.
Director heminger heminger.
Director henderson. Henderson. I
director hinsey. I I. Director.
So I. So I chair eken. Eken. I
thank you. The consent calendar
is approved. Thank you. Let's
move on to the regular calendar.
Please call item 11. Item 11
authorizing the director of
transportation to issue a
request for proposals for
contract number sf mta 202420
fta for consulting services
supporting the communications
based train control upgrade
project for initial term of five
years in an amount not to exceed
$25 million, with five options
to extend the term for an
additional year for a total of
ten years in an amount not to
exceed $36 million. Good
afternoon, directors. I'm dan
howard. I'm the project manager
for the train control upgrade
project at. Today. We're going
to give you you decide to give
the opportunity to give you a
little bit of a project update
in addition to requesting your
permission to issue the rfp for
our project consultants. So
we'll go through a little bit of
the background as well as the
project objectives and the
progress report. We'll talk
about our approach for risk and
then go into the contracting
strategy of which this
consultant rfp is a part. So why
are we upgrading the train
control system for our muni
rail, our train control system
is approaching 30 years old and
it has not been comprehensively
overhauled during its life. Some
core components are still the
original components from 1994
1998, and in some cases the
system supplier has given us
notice. As for some of the parts
that they're obsolete, no longer
manufactured and no longer
supported. Up on the screen you
see the floppy disks that we
boot the computer up each
morning with. Those are the
actual floppy disks. Is the
state of the art now. And the
train control industry has
passed us by by several
generations. But because we
haven't meaningfully upgraded
the system, this actually
presents a unique opportunity to
reconsider our train control
needs and to host an open bid
for the replacement model train
control systems. Today they
track all of the train locations
. They prevent collisions and
they manage the spacing between
trains as well as headways in
the tunnel. They automatically
operate the trains by
controlling the accelerator and
braking. They set the train's
routing in the system by
distinguishing between a j and a
k and l or an m because of those
functions. As the train control
system has outsized influence on
our service delivery, the train
control system can help us
ensure consistent travel times
and frequencies. It can also
allow muni to offer flexible
service plans and better rider
communication during special
events and service disruptions
such as apec. This we can also
reduce some types of delays that
are caused by train congestion
or traffic signal delays or
junction delays. As I mentioned,
our current system is aging. It
has outdated hardware and
software that's increasingly
obsolete and difficult to
maintain on due to the lack of
parts. And as our maintainers
retire, it's we're also losing
experience both on the on the
supplier side as well as the
sfmta side. The system is also
dependent on 1980s technology
that is fragile and easily
disturbed, which complicates our
efforts to modernize and to
upgrade unrelated aspects like
the special trackwork, for
example. So oftentimes in
service we have trains that fail
to connect to the atcs and they
have to operate without it. When
that happens, that causes gaps.
Bunching slowdowns and rolling
congestion throughout the
system. The 2019 muni
reliability working group, which
was a panel of mta board members
, supervisors, advocates, labor
and transit experts, recommended
that we replace the atcs in as
as a top priority for muni in
additional a there is no train
control on the surface. On the
surface, trains are unregulated
and therefore our junctions are
first come, first serve and the
traffic signals that are meant
to work with those junctions
have limited ability to
coordinate because they cannot
see the trains coming in advance
. So we're working against the
clock where we don't know the
end of the countdown. Two weeks
ago, the system experienced a
complete failure of the central
components. In the morning of
OCTOBER 24th, trains were
stopped in the tunnel for nearly
half an hour. As time passes, it
will likely it will become more
likely that we'll experience
failures such as this that will
affect service. And without
spare parts we run the risk of
even greater disruption. The
agency is working behind the
scenes to refurbish our own
spares, salvage what we can
obtain used equipment from
sister systems. But when we're
doing that, we're borrowing
time. We'll need to replace the
in about the next 5 to 8 years
upgrading and upgrade and
modernizing the current train
control system to current
technology will itself provide
benefits just by adding the
modern technological
capabilities such as wi-fi that
we all are familiar with to
improve metro performance and
reliability. On top of that, we
are also planning to expand
train control to the surface
where it doesn't presently exist
to allow us to have
comprehensive rail service
management and to compensate for
some of the drawbacks on the
geometric layout of our city's
railway. We can't completely
overcome the limitations that
we've inherited from our
streetcar system. But kbtc can
significantly address the delays
that are caused by signaling and
congestion and kbtc is a strong
investment in the reliability
and capacity of our muni rail
service. So after the need, I'm
going to go into the project,
the train control project that I
manage is a ten year project to
update the atcs to a modern kbtc
and to expand the oversight of
kbtc to the surface portion of
the rail network. These are the
key objectives for the project.
The project will increase our
system capacity of muni,
allowing us to run more frequent
service. It will also extend
upon the exemplary safety record
of our current atcs and actually
extend those safety benefits.
This system wide as opposed to
just the subway. It will allow
us to have more consistent train
spacing and travel times. It
will support our service at all
times. It will allow us
flexibility for special events
and contingency operations ins.
And we're also taking the
opportunity to build in with
with the supplier contract,
continual system upgrades on
hardware and software so that we
don't find ourselves in a
position where we have a 30 year
old system. Again in these are
some of the benefits that we
expect to deliver to riders once
the project is done. Transit
riders can expect to have fewer
delays after the project has
been delivered. They can expect
to have faster trips and less
time waiting between trains.
They can also expect to have
more consistent wait times that
match the advertised frequency
as opposed to frustrating
bunching and gaps. They can also
expect not to be stuck between
stations in the in the tunnel,
as was the case in 2018 and
2019. And they also will allow
our our transportation
management center to have more
flexibility in managing service
out in the outer reaches of the
system. So the train control
project will be delivered in
phases, starting with the pilot
phase. That will be a limited
street running area that will
validate the complete street
kbtc system. This is this is
proposed on an area of track
that is both critical to our
service with the to the ballpark
and the chase center. But it's
also an area where we don't
presently have train control. So
it represents a lower risk in
terms of failures. If there is a
failure on the pilot phase, we
would simply revert back to the
operating rules that we have
today. Once we've successfully
demonstrated the system is
capable from the equipment on
the vehicles to the equipment on
the wayside to the central
equipment, will then take on the
most technically complex part of
the project, which is replacing
the existing atcs with the new
system in the market, street and
central subways concurrent to
that will be also beginning to
do the planning and design and
implementation for the exterior
lines such as the nlcm and t and
j. To give you a little schedule
update right now, we're
currently working through the
vendor selection and contracting
process. So in JANUARY you
authorize us to issue an rfp and
to select a supplier for the
kbtc system. We issued the rfp
in MARCH and we received
proposals after several
extension requests from the
suppliers. We did finally
receive proposals on OCTOBER
10th. Currently we have those
proposals in hand and we are
evaluate eating the bids going
forward. We expect to bring a
contract to you for the train
control supplier in the summer
and we'll also plan. We also
plan to bring the contract for
this consultant that you're
considering on this item today.
Around the same time, so that
we'll take them both to the
board together following your
approval, we'll need the board
of supervisors approval for both
contracts. And so we anticipate
a notice to proceed for the
train control supplier in early
2025, which is what you see on
the screen there. Following the
ncp. We expect an 18 month
design period, followed by the
beginning of the pilot phase. We
expect to deliver the first
pilot segment and have it be
operational in 2028 and then to
turn over the subway to kbtc
permanently in 2030, we
expansion to the surface will
also, on the surface lines will
take place concurrent. Lee so
we'll be able to deliver those a
little bit faster with the last
one finishing in 2032. And then
after we finished all the
deployment, the contract that
you authorize us to, to
advertise for includes up to 20
years of support for the ctc
from the supplier. Our funding
approach, which is inextricably
linked to uncertainty. And at
this point of the project we are
in the most the highest period
of uncertainty. Given that the
bids are out and we don't yet
have an understanding of what
the impact of those of the
contract values MAY be, we are
going taking the project through
the process and we should have a
much better picture for when we
when the board is updated on the
budget and the cip next year.
But right now in our current
cap, we're funded at 290 million
in this cip. But we estimate the
project overall project cost to
be over 600 million. It's
important to note that we have
been successful in attracting
some competitive grants and
discretionary funding sources,
and that continues to be our
project approach for funding is
to use the project work that
we've done, as well as the
funding that we've secured to
attract more funding from the
federal government and state in
the form of grants. We
anticipate that the strength of
this project will will continue
to attract those grants. Now to
just give you a brief kind of
overview of some of the work
that we've been doing with the
risk management on the project,
we've done a lot of work when it
comes to the interweaving
questions of risk within the
project. So as you can see, it's
kind of like a brick wall that
you're laying a foundation
that's based on decisions. And
then as you as you continue, you
have to base more risk decisions
on top of those decisions. And
so the point that we're that
we're making here is that the a
project that we have has many
unavoidable risks. And some of
those risks translate directly
into costs. Some of them are
scheduled risk. And but each one
of them carries a risk that we
it carries a choice that we have
to make in terms of are we going
to accept the risk or are we
going to try to mitigate it
further, which does itself take
time and money. So an example of
that is, is the risk that we
have erred where we wanted to
obtain a system of high quality.
We knew that with our
procurement strategy, we that we
wouldn't be able to do that with
a low bid construction type
contract. So we separated out
the installation work. But by
separating out the installation
work that created something else
that we that we needed to
manage. And we and we ultimately
decided in the beginning of that
of that art exercise that the
risk of sfmta managing a
separate installer was a lower
risk than the implications of
having a poor quality train
control system. And so those are
the types of decisions that
we're making on a regular basis.
And there are dozens and dozens
of examples of that in addition
to help us manage those, the mta
board has created a
subcommittee. I think we've met
three times in the past year
that really provides a forum for
staff to discuss those risks
with the board members. I know
lately it's been a little bit
difficult because we've been in
this contracting mode and
haven't been able to express
everything that we want to
express with the with the
procurement rules. But soon
we'll be through that phase and
we'll be able to work together a
little bit more closely on on
the design questions on
questions of bringing the
installers on board and
construction. But we did cover a
lot this year. We covered the
overall risks that obsolescence
poses to metro service risks
that we intend that we expected
to encounter during this
procurement process. Risks to
the schedule and how to how to
communicate those transparently.
Any pricing that risk, which is
an ongoing effort. And we intend
to have some more development in
next year about that and
managing the uncertainty that we
know exists in the budget as
well as we really left no stone
unturned when it came to
researching international best
practices and lessons learned,
both from sfmta and other
projects. And we and we did give
get a lot of good feedback from
the subcommittee. There. So
moving into our contracting
strategy, as I mentioned before,
because in part we wanted to
select a robust train control
supplier and select them on
their merits and also the
ability of the supplier to
provide long term support, which
is actually something that mta
hasn't really done in the past.
It's always been an
afterthought. You know, you buy
the system and then later you
get around to doing a sole
source contract for the support.
We decided, you know, we really
want to put the support up front
and center. So it is, you know,
we had to go and receive
permission from the board of
supervisors to negotiate an up
to 30 year contract, which is
which is a little bit
groundbreaking working. And by
doing that, we had to create
this this structure here that
you see on the screen where we
have the supplier responsible
for providing the system.
They're also going to be our
design partners. So as soon as
we get them on board, we're
going to have them really doing
the heavy lifting in terms of
designs, requirements that, as I
mentioned, that's the contract,
that's that. The rfp was issued
in MARCH and the bids that were
evaluating the contract that
circled is the one that's before
you today. MAY the 2nd of the
three, which is the consultant
contract that allows us to
support our project management.
It provides some international
expertise, design expertise to
bear on the system and to
generally support things like
construction management and
other avenues. And then later,
as we go through each of the
individual phases, we'll be
bringing individual rail
installer contracts and the nice
thing about that approach is
that when we bring those
installer contracts before you,
they will be based on 100%
design. So there should be
little to no risk in in those
because we have worked out all
the design details and will be
much further along than some of
the other contracts that we
typically negotiate. So the
consultant rfp, as was mentioned
, this is an as needed technical
services contract supporting
sfmta. The initial term is for
five years and $25 million.
We've added five options of one
year each, bringing the total to
ten years and not to exceed of
$36 million. That's that's out
of an over $600 million budget.
The key rationale, as I
mentioned, it's part of our risk
management strategy in risks
pertaining to the project. We
also have a need to augment our
technical staff acutely when
we're having difficulty hiring,
particularly engineers, onto the
project. There is not a lot of
engineering experience in the
united states, much less the bay
area. And so we've had
difficulty bringing those
members on as full time staff.
We do have some open positions.
If anyone is interested in
applying, we'd love to have your
application, but in the meantime
we'll use the consultants to
help augment that. We'll also be
hiring junior engineers in the
hope that they can we can build
them up and teach them the
knowledge from the consultants
and have them learn. And then
we're also going to need a third
party to help us hold the
supplier and the account
installer accountable to the
obligations of their contract.
So this is a summary of the
services that are included in
the consultant rfp, which is
part of your packet. But in the
general, the general sense, we
have some project management and
admin support, construction
management support design and
engineering. As I mentioned,
they're not going to be the
designers that's going to be the
supplier, but they will help
sfmta evaluate those designs
when we get submittals as system
integration support. So those
are the number of systems that
the kbtc will have to talk to,
like our cad system or our
prediction system. We'll have
support there to help us should
we need it, qa support so sfmta
will have a large qa
responsibility needing to qa
both the suppliers designs and
the suppliers equipment as well
as the installation work that
was done. Testing and
commissioning will be a large
part of this project. It I
expect in future years when we
get to that point to be
providing regular updates on
this progress of that and
consultant support will help us
again have more eyes, make sure
that that goes smoothly with
minimal disruption to the
riding, public safety and
security evaluation is critical
to the acceptance of the of the
system from the cpuc, fta and
other regulatory bodies to
making sure that we get
authorization to operate the
system. And then as was
necessary, we also believe that
we'll need some post delivery
and operations and maintenance
consulting because there will be
a strong learning curve as we
transition our tmc, our field
staff, our train operators to a
new system from an old system.
We don't believe we'll be able
to do that with just the
supplier. But we'll also need
some consultant support to help
us create materials and smooth
that that transition along. So
again, the action before you
today, we recommend that you
authorize the director of
transportation to issue an rfp
for contract 20 2420 fta for
consulting services, supporting
the kbtc upgrade project and
again, those terms five years
for 25 million with five options
to extend for an additional year
for a total of ten years, not to
exceed 36 million. And that
concludes my presentation. Thank
you. Thank you, colleagues.
Deputy city attorney susan
cleveland. Also, I'd like to
make a comment before we come to
you. Yeah, thank you, chair.
Deputy city attorney susan
cleveland-knowles. I just wanted
to follow up on something that I
think dan explained pretty well
in his presentation. But there
are two separate out things
underway right now. First is the
consultant contract, which is
what is in front of you today.
So that is where the prime
discussion should focus for
today. Second, there is an
ongoing evaluation of the
communication based train
control system going on, but
that is in the middle of a
procurement. So to ensure that
the procurement process is
conducted fairly, there should
not be information provided to
the public today regarding
regarding the ongoing
procurement. So, for example, a
number of bids, the ongoing
evaluation process, all of that
is not to be disclosed today. So
my colleague david ennis, who
has been advising dan and the
team on this procurement, is on
webex, an and I just didn't want
people to be startled if he
jumps in from the internet to
interrupt a discussion or a
question. So we'll try to keep
try to keep the discussion going
down the right track. But I just
wanted to make sure that was
understood. And thank you, dan,
for making that fairly clear in
your presentation. Ann, thanks.
Thank you so much for the
clarification and I just want to
also acknowledge the service of
my colleagues, director
hemminger so and henderson on
the train control upgrade
project subcommittee. And so
we'd love to open it up to you
all first, if you have any
thoughts or recommendations for
director henzi and myself, and I
think I saw you, director
henderson, raise your hand first
. Sure. Is that me? Yes. So our
to our council. I'd like to ask
a question about the other
contract. Are you saying I can't
ask any questions about it? Or
just those related to the
current evaluation of the
proposals. I'll let david
clarify, but I think it's mostly
related to the evaluation of the
proposals. But david, do you
have anything to add? Yeah, this
is deputy city attorney david
innes. Um you can ask about the
public information about the
ongoing procurement. In fact,
the rfp was reviewed and
approved by the board, but any
information regarding the
progress the any details on
participants, even what is going
on on our side regarding the
ongoing evaluation of the
proposals is protected
information and shouldn't be
disclosed at this point. At the
risk of potentially undermining
the process and requiring it to
be started over again. Okay.
Well, maybe just to avoid heart
attacks here, I'll I'll defer
the question about the contract
to another time. I think it
would be helpful, dan, to hear
about about how you built the
cost estimate for the contract
that is before us today. Okay.
It's a lot of money, but it's
also an investment in an even
bigger sum of money that we're
going to be be seeking approval
for later. So where did where
did this number come from? Thank
you for the question. The number
came from it started out as a as
a round and a percentage figure
of the overall cost. We looked
at that as a kind of ground
truth to make sure we weren't
out of out of whack. This is an
as needed contract. So the
number that you're seeing before
you is a cap that that I don't
intend to hit. I expect it
actually to be less. There are
significant services that are in
this contract for example, with
system integration services that
sfmta intends to self-perform.
Um, and so those, those
provisions in the contract are
kind of an insurance policy that
if we need additional support,
it's there. So we based our
annual estimate of one point. It
was 1.3 a year as million a year
based on actual number of hours
that we would use using
comparable sfmta
classifications. So that that
wound up being less than the
overall amount. And then we
added a little we had about 25%
contingency fee. And then
bounced that off of the overall
project cost. So as I said, we
expect to spend less than the
cap, but the cap was was put in
place also to include and
inflation as well over the over
the ten year life of the
project. And this is a
professional services contract,
right? So we're not talking
about low bid or anything like
that. Yeah. So the way that
we'll receive bids will be they
won't be bidding on the overall
the overall cap number that you
see before you. That's not going
to change through negotiations.
What is going to change is the
rates. So we're going to we're
going to be negotiating salary
rates, which is essentially to
me as a pm, that's that's how
fast are we accelerating towards
that cap. And so we will be
looking at that. And we will be
looking at essentially the year
over year expenditures. But we
won't we won't necessarily use
it all. Okay and colleagues, let
me just make one last point and
then ask my new fellow committee
members. One thing. The chair
able was able to pull off is to
remove herself from this
committee by appointing the rest
of us to it. But that's, you
know, power has its privileges
as the last thing I wanted to
talk about is risk and risk
management. And I commend the
staff for taking that question
head on and seriously, we
obviously, we have had the
ability to benefit from a couple
of risky projects that we just
finished. I think there's
probably a limited amount of
transference of knowledge there
because the other two projects
were big honking civil
construction on and this is
really a software job and those
can be the worst if you follow
the industry in terms of
remember how long it took the
state of california to get a new
dmv computer. So given the fact
that it is a unique contract, i
think that emphasizes all the
more that we really take the
risk question seriously, I think
you're covering in the areas
that ought to be covered. The
one that we're not covering and
really aren't able to do is the
donald rumsfeld the unknown
unknowns at and I think a good
robust risk process takes
account of the fact that there
are things we don't know. And we
really can't know them at the
beginning of the work. And we
have to build in some what I
would call humility into
estimates. We make of time and
cost and I know you've heard me
talk about it until you're
probably sick of it, but I do
think we need to factor in that
element of risk as well. The
risks that we don't know,
because very often the one you
don't know is the one that
really kills you. So again,
thanks for the effort. Thanks
for keeping our committee
informed. I know the last time
we met I was out of town, so I
believe you met with the other
two members. And I'd certainly
like to give them a chance to
make their comments. Now okay.
Thank you, director. So please.
Thank you for sharing your
knowledge. It's amazing. I love
this. I just want to piggyback
rye on what my fellow director,
peter hemminger, said that the
unknown is the usually is the
one that throw us off the track.
So in your $36 million budget,
what is your contingency
percentage. For the for the
consultant and contract? It's
25% across the project. It's
actually 25% as well. But
director hemminger was I think
was alluding to we have more
work to do next year. We what we
did with the building, the
project up again, we're at an
early stage in the project so
we're we're using building
blocks, rough order of magnitude
estimates and now we're only
starting to kind of crest the
surface and get into some more
of the details now that we're
getting proposals. And when we
get into design. So the work
that we have ahead of us, I
believe, on top of that is to
identify risks and price those
individually while maintain our
25% contingency for the unknown
unknowns. Okay that's do you do
you think that 25% is kind of in
the higher end side for content
agency? Just wanted to get a
sense of scale here. I believe
it's about standard for
projects, for professional. It's
about middle of the road. Yeah.
Okay um, your slide about
putting the three different
contract outs in the same page,
it was very helpful. So thank
you. And my understanding is the
supplier, the rfp already you
already received all the
proposal and that's in the
procurement. Yes. So now we're
talking about the consultant rfp
. I'm trying to understand the
timeline about the consultant
rfp. When we award them the
contract, would it be in sync
with the same schedule of when
we award the supplier contract?
Because I've tried to see that I
would assume when we have these
engineers and experts in traffic
control, what they propose for
us to do only makes sense if our
supplier has the capacity to
deliver. So it's a chicken and
an egg thing. So I like to know
are is it am I am I wrong or am
i right or what's what's our
plan? No no, I think it's a good
question. I think so. The
supplier rfp was much more
complex than this as needed
services contract. So it
required it requires a much
longer process to work out
through all the details. Our
intent is, is we issued that one
first. So it started ahead of us
right? But we plan to issue the
consultant rfp now and have that
basically catch up. If you
imagine them in a race. And so
our goal is when they when we
get to the finish line and when
we come back to you for contract
approval, that we'll be able to
present you both the supplier
and the consultant around the
same board meeting. So they
should come at the same time,
which will then mean that when
we give the supplier rfp or np,
that we're giving the consultant
np right around the same time as
well. So we want them both to
come on board at the same time.
And that was how we designed the
process. Okay, great. And didn't
have the luxury to read the
draft rfp, but I think I
remember I mentioned it to you
in our first historical teacup
meeting. Thank you for the
orientations. The sp and db goal
of 15. I like to see that we
actually also have micro lba for
our san francisco, so minority
business contract participations
. Yes. And is virginia harmon on
the phone to speak to? Yeah.
Great. Virginia harmon. Good
afternoon chair ekin members of
the board director tumlin
virginia harmon. I am the
manager of the contract
compliance office. I'm the
agency db liaison officer. And
you ask a very good question.
What about the microbes? Well
they can participate on this
project because we are presently
implementing two different types
of programs. One is the lba
program. Um, and we use that
program when projects are
locally funded and the other is
our dbe program. When the
projects are federally funded,
our dbe program requires us to
set an sp goal. And for firms to
achieve that goal, they have to
be certified as dbs under the
dot program. Sbs under the state
of california department of
general services program or or
lbz under the city's local
business enterprise program. So
firms can participate in that
way. On this project. And as you
know, the goal is set at 15. Sp
participation. So we're looking
to see dbs. Sbs and lbi's lisd
bid by the prime bidders to
achieve those goals. Okay so
there are opportunities there
for this. This project is highly
specialized and but we did work
in consultation with the project
team and identified that there
were some opportunities still,
in spite of the highly
specialized nature of the work
and some of those areas are, you
know, project management or
construction management work,
administrate on contract
management work and all of those
areas. And we're hoping to see
sp participation there. Okay,
great. Thank you very much. Does
that answer your question? It
does. Okay. Thank you. DR.
Henderson, please. Virginia I
have a question for you. I think
just along that line of the
business goals, I'm curious if
there I think I heard that there
are some uncertainty with just
how much of the 600 million will
be paid from different sources.
So if we run into a windfall and
it's, you know, a different
source than anticipated, so if
it's a federal source or a state
source, and we expected it to be
something different, does that
change at all the sp or db
goals? No so it will likely not
change in the circumstance.
Typically when we fund projects
with federal money, there's a
requirement that we use the
federal program so we can't
switch back to the local program
just because we got some more
local money. So we're we'll be
stuck in this federal program,
but it's okay because in fact,
we are are able to accept the
certifications under the sba
program that we're presently
implementing. Oh, you are? Yes,
we do accept certifications
under our sba program. Okay. Got
it. Okay. And then in terms of
the outreach or excuse me,
preparation for these businesses
to be competitive, is there
something specific that you are
doing that maybe you have not
done in the past that you expect
to be able to reach these goals
better? Well, we do routine
outreach, you know, throughout
throughout the year on all of
our projects and all of the
projects that we're planning to
bid on this project. In
particular, though, we've been
meeting with the community and
of small businesses and have
discussed with them the
opportunities that are upcoming.
Okay. Thank you. And I just
wanted to say finally in
wrapping up, I think we had a
really robust discussion on at
the teacup meeting on friday and
I really appreciate this
presentation on and the way
staff was able to make this very
complex and long term project
understandable in bite size
pieces. I think that the well,
not the concern, but the thing
that came out of it to me is
that this is such a long term
project and it's sort of the way
the approach that you all are
taking is pretty not unusual,
but it's something that you're
testing out. And so I do hope
that we really do keep track of
the lessons learned so that in
however many decades when you're
putting the little microchip on
the screen to show the outdated
technology that the staff of
this agency will be able to will
have those breadcrumbs that can
help lead them to a solution in
in the next upgrade. So please
do keep that in mind. You know,
just the institutional knowledge
and figuring out a way to make
sure that that that this process
is memorialized in a way that
can be helpful. So that maybe
the next upgrade is shorter or
maybe more affordable and the
other thing that I wanted to
just have a good understanding
about is or a little bit of
clarity about is that we
anticipate bringing the other
contracts in a couple of months,
right? The supplier, is there an
additional contract that's going
to come with that or is just the
supplier box? Yeah. So next year
, as we think around the summer
is when we'll plan to bring the
supplier and the consultant
contracts to you. There is the
installer contracts, but we're
going to bring those one at a
time as we start the
construction of each phase. So
those won't be for several
years. Okay. All right. Thank
you. If after all of the comment
and everything, I would like to
move the item. Okay. Thank you,
director tomlin. Yes, I wanted
to thank director hemminger for
his comment about risk and being
transparent about risk. The
reason why the subway is working
better today than it has in
decades is not because we have
more resources, but rather
because the team has been really
thoughtful about risk and
communication in trying new
approaches in order to operate
it better and maintain it
better. I think we've learned a
lot over the last couple of
years about the necessity of
being very up front and
transparent about the risks and
things that we worry about and
tracking those over time so that
we can make course corrections
continually as well as build
trust. The presentation that dan
, I believe gave to the train
control subcommittee had a much
longer discussion about risk,
which dan also presented to the
entire executive team and will
be using as a model moving
forward so that we're
continually reporting on the
things that are worrying us,
whether it's schedule or cost or
installation concerns or
contractor concerns as we want
to be very transparent about all
of that rather than hide the
problem because it's through
transparency that we can
actually deliver this project
successfully. This is something
that we are modeling in our
capital programs and
construction division as well as
throughout the transit division.
And I'm hoping that it will be
the model for the rest of the
agency in terms of managing
complex projects. Yes. And
finally, I need to I need to
correct the record. Previously,
I have made statements
erroneously stating that our
train control system is loaded
off of 1976, era 5.25in floppy
disks. I stand corrected and
note that it is loaded off of
1980s era 3.5in disks. We are
much further ahead in our
technological development than I
had previously stated, and I
want the record to reflect that.
Thank you, director hensley.
Please awesome. Thank you. And
thank you again to my colleagues
for serving on the train control
subcommittee. I think this is
making this item easier for
chicken, and I do just have one
question for dan on, um, that
you expressed a desire to
hopefully we spend less on this
contract, on this contract, but
it being an as needed contract
out to that end, I was wondering
and you showed in one of your
final slides, you showed
possible service that might be
included in this contract. But
will you be requiring whoever
the subcontractor is to submit
scopes of work? Often that are
specific, like every year, once
a year, you know, so to help
kind of control the cost cost on
that. Yeah thank you for the
question that speaks to the way
we intend to manage the contract
, which is through an annual
work plan. So each year on the
anniversary of the contract, we
would go over with the
consultant team the expected
tasks that we expect to have
them accomplish and help us with
through the year. So it'll be
part of our annual project
planning discussions. We can
also meet with them more
frequently if we if an urgent
needs arise. But at least every
year we'll go over that with
them and we'll essentially be
selecting from that menu that
you saw. And under that menu
there are subheadings of
individual of the types of other
individual supporting tasks of
which of those tasks we feel
like we'll need. So we
definitely won't there won't
ever be a year. I mean, knock on
wood, I don't think they'll ever
be a year where we need all of
those in one year, right? Like
there there's going to be some
that are going to lie dormant,
you know, there's one about post
delivery support. We're
obviously not going to need that
till the end of the project, but
the so we'll be selecting from
those and then the consulting
will essentially build their
team for the year. They need to
understand and plan their
workflow and so the structure of
the rfp is reflects that as
well. We as opposed to some
other as needed contracts, we're
not asking the consultant to
commit a large number of staff
exclusively to this project and
to locate them here because we
know or we intend not to use
them frequently enough to
require that. So we've required
a small number of staff to serve
for continuity purposes as the
project management staff. When I
say small, I'm saying about
four. And then and then then
they're meant to identify by
their lead personnel. They're
experts in each of those
different disciplines who MAY be
assigned to other projects, but
who we expect to be available
for ours. Now that's where the
devil will be in the details is
availability of individual
staff. And so we'll be each one
of those annual work plans will
be kind of a negotiation of
sorts between the consultant
team and the project team in
terms of who we're getting, what
the overall level of effort or
number of hours is and cost. And
we'll be using that as a
mechanism to control costs so
that we remain under the cap.
Perfect. Sounds like there's a
responsible plan in place for
that. And so, MADAM Chair, after
discussion in public comment,
I'll I'll will gladly. Second
director henderson's motion of
approval. Thank you. Thank you,
director hensley. Colleagues I
will open it up to public
comment at this point for those
in the room, any speakers is
seeing none. Please open a
remote at this time. We'll move
to remote public comment not to
exceed a total time of ten
minutes. Members of the public
wishing to comment should dial
star three to enter the queue.
Each speaker will have two
minutes. Moderator for speaker
for. Thank you. Good afternoon.
Chair amanda egan, alita dupree.
For the record, she and her I
request your leave to speak on
this train control item and I
have standing. This is very
important and I haven't been on
the subway in a while, but I
have been on the subway at times
when things were not quite
working as right as I hoped. And
while it has improved, yes, i
learned something new today
about these floppy disks and 80s
technology things I had in high
school. So I think we have to
work at improve this. I can't
say I have a long history with
writing on the subway in san
francisco, so it goes back to
2009. But I do have this summer
a resume of using communication
based train control in new york
city. On there train system,
which is actually called a
subway. Perhaps some of you have
gotten to see it and use it and
the kbtc does perform markedly
better than the than the systems
or the older systems, some of
which are 80 years old. So I
enjoy my time riding on the
seven line and some of those
other new sections. So I hope we
can do this work quickly and
there's going to be more
contracts coming along. But I
want to have the best subway
that we can for san francisco
and I'd like to see how train
control works on the surface, I
guess. I guess we're going to
turn the trains into autonomous
vehicles. That'll be very
interesting because I follow
that. So. So I appreciate it.
And thank you for the welcome
that you have shown me to speak
on this. Thank you. No
additional speakers. Okay that
will close public comment at so
colleagues, this subcommittee is
a little bit of a an unusual
format for us. We haven't done
this too much the way the board
of supervisors does. But if any
of you do have a recommendation
for us to consider now or in the
future going forward, I'd be
happy to hear that. Just because
you're able to dive much deeper
into the topic. But director
henderson, I think you had a
motion. There was a motion and a
second. Great. Let's call the
roll on the motion to approve
director heminger heminger.
Director henderson henderson
director hinsey. Hi director. So
I. So I chair egan. I egan, I
thank you. The item is approved.
Thank you. Please call item 12.
Item number 12 approving an
amendment to the sfmta's zero
emission vehicle policy to allow
for future trolley bus
acquisition in and extend the
timeline for achieving a 100%
zero emission fleet to align
with the california air
resources board and innovate
their board's innovative clean
transit ict regulation timeline,
which is currently 2040. Good
afternoon. Julie kirschbaum,
transit director. Thank you for
the opportunity to bring to you
a recommendation to modify our
bus electrification policy. Our
road to low and zero emissions
vehicles is a program that I'm
very proud of. I want to talk
today about some of the
highlights of that program as
well as where we think our
policy work needs to go in order
to continue that success. This
addressing the climate crisis is
a core value driving our work.
It's one we talk about a lot and
is articulated in our citywide
climate action plan. Our biggest
challenge is the transport
sector, which makes up 44% of
san francisco's greenhouse gas
emissions. But I'm very proud to
say that public transit makes up
less than half a percent of
those emissions. Within the
transport sector. Our biggest
challenge is private vehicles,
private cars and trucks, which
is why all of the work we do
around making transit and
walking and rolling and biking
attractive. So important it by
contrast, you can't even see
muni on the graph and that is
because we make up less than
0.0001% of the gas emissions.
Not only is the majority of our
fleet electric, but the hybrids
that we operate are operated
using renewable diesel and our
fossil fuel free. The reason I
started with this is to make
sure that as we think about
these important goals around
zero emissions vehicles, that we
also continue to recognize that
the best way to reduce emissions
is by improving modal share is
by tackling that that difficult
30, as you saw, we had the honor
of hosting the uitp trolley
commission a couple of weeks ago
and the secretary general,
basically the head of uitp said
something that really stuck with
me, which is I would rather have
a diesel bus and a transit lane
than an electric bus stuck in
traffic and I that really
resonated with me because
getting to a fleet that is zero
emission is important. But
supporting that fleet with
protected transit lanes and with
a safe and clean bus shelters
and all of the other things that
we are doing to improve service
quality is critical. I
introduced this framing because
one of the things I am going to
be signaling today is that we do
think we need to continue to
purchase hybrid busses as part
of our overall fleet program and
that is explicitly to continue
to support those modal share
goals. If we are not able to
continue to buy a combination
version of electric and hybrid
vehicles, we will be forced to
keep our vehicles past their
useful life and we will lose
some of the transformative
nature that we've seen in our
fleet program. Our fleet program
is really it's really principles
based and it's something I'm so
proud that our maintenance and
our engineering staff have
embraced. We started by saying
that we were going to design a
performance based specification
and what that means is we are
not telling the bus
manufacturers how to build a bus
or where to put their engine,
what kind of door to design. We
are telling them that we need
vehicles that do not break down
and can be maintained easily and
that they stand behind in terms
of warranty and they're helping
us to build the best vehicle
that they can build. We've then
committed to make sure that we
are maintaining, bring it to the
highest standard. And that
really means meeting and
oftentimes using data to exceed
what the manufacturer owners are
recommending. So that we are
fixing components on busses
before they break, not waiting
for them to break the last kind
of key piece of this program is
that we keep these vehicles in a
state of good repair, which
means not keeping vehicles past
their useful life and continuing
to replace them on an ad needed
basis. Our progress towards zero
emissions has been mighty. As I
said, we are fortunate that all
of our trolley busses, our
trains, our beloved cable car
and historic vehicles are
powered by clean hydropower from
the hetch hetchy dam. And our
hybrids, which we were an early
adopter of in 2007 and now
represent our full diesel fleet,
run on renewable diesel. We've
also, as the technology for
hybrid busses, has advanced,
we've really taken advantage of
it. The last 68 vehicles that we
purchased, for example, can be.
Completely zero emissions
through about 25% of their
route. So we have used a
partnership with the
manufacturer and gps coordinates
to make sure that these busses
are running completely battery
through some of the neighborhood
roads like chinatown and the
tenderloin that are experien
facing a disproportionate
portion of that vehicle.
Emissions that I talked about
earlier. We are also now
successfully piloting electric
busses. We now have ten busses,
soon to be 12 from four
different manufacturers, us and
the pilot is teaching us a lot.
The first thing that it's
teaching us is that these busses
really can handle san francisco
conditions. It can handle our
terrain, it can handle all our
our heavy passenger loads. We're
testing them all over the city.
So everybody is benefiting from
them. And we've put these big
lightning bolts on them. So
people know that they're they're
part of our experiment. We are
also not seeing the reliability
yet on these vehicles that we
are seeing on our hybrid fleet.
And we are currently working to
hold these different
manufacturers accountable, all
to improve the quality of their
product, to meet the
expectations lines of our
customers. We have also learned
a tremendous amount about the
facilities and the facility work
is absolutely the most
challenging thing. Pieces of
this we have now 12 plug in
chargers at our woods division
and we are so grateful that we
have received a large federal
grant that will allow us to add
an additional 12 chargers
chargers that have the overhead
pantograph, which is a much
easier way to charge the
vehicles, along with. Six sps
lots at a creek that will allow
us to pilot 60 foot electric
vehicles, which we're also very
anxious to test everything we do
in the fleet world because of
electric location is now
inextricably linked to our
facility program. And these two
teams and these kind of two
worlds have worked together to
create a really a living plan
and a living approach. When we
adopted the 2018 policy, we it
was very restrictive. It
eliminated all busses except for
battery electric, and that
included the trolley busses. And
as a result, the potrero
facility, which is going to be
our first new facility
investment, was anticipating
kind of short term trolley, but
then really a transition to
electrification in we are now
strongly recommending based on
what we've learned in the last 6
or 7 years that the agency stay
vested in trolleys, which means
that potrero would become really
the trolley hub of the of the
agency. It has expanded in space
in it and would allow us to move
the majority of our trolley
vehicles to this central
location. The zero emissions
policy, which the board adopted
in 2018, called for us to be
100% zero emissions by 2035 and
to not buy anything but battery
electric busses by 2025. I am
here today to ask you to modify
that policy because it is not
achievable or it's really only
achievable if we don't buy new
busses, which I believe will
degrade our transit experience.
We adopted our policy about nine
months ahead of the california
air resources board and which
has adopted a slightly more
relaxed goal of 2040 and the
carb program does also allow for
exemptions based on some of the
challenges we're seeing,
particularly around funding and
utility coordination. So our
main recommendation today is
that we modify the policy to be
more expansive, to allow all
zero emissions vehicles,
including trolleys as well as to
align our time line with the
california air resources board
timeline. As I indicate. Did I
think the biggest hurdle in
front of us is funding
jonathan's team is estimating
that just the electrification
portions of the building
progress program are upwards of
$1.3 billion. We also are seeing
about a 30% premium between
hybrids and electric vehicles.
So that in and of itself is also
another about a quarter of $1
billion. So this is this is a
lot of money. It's a lot of
need. And we have frankly had a
mixed record, which is not
unique to california. Yeah, I
had an opportunity this morning
to speak at a conference about
the us transition to clean
busses and there was a southern
california property de octa
there. And one of the things
they pointed out is that because
california was such a leader in
early adoption of low emissions,
we are not receiving federal
kind of credit when we compete
for these grants because we are
not seeing dry dramatic drops in
emissions because as I showed
you, we're at 0.001. But by not
helping us with this journey and
with this regulatory
requirement, it's almost rewards
the states that didn't make the
same investment that california
made in low emissions. So the
main the main pivot that I'm
asking is that we continue on an
ambitious journey towards zero
emissions. But that our vehicles
track with our facility capacity
. This is the program jonathan
is here to answer all your hard
questions about it. But it does
start out with the two pilots. I
talked about. We are then
working towards the kirkland
yard being our first fully
electric facility. The benefits
of starting with kirkland is it
is an open air facility. It is
relatively straightforward in
terms of the construction
process, but it is an unfunded
construction project. So we have
been moving as much money as we
can to keep the design going
because as we very much want to
open up this facility in 2028,
we also believe that as the
project matures, it will become
more competitive of for
discretionary funding. The
second, all electric facility
would be a slave creek, but we
don't currently see a pathway to
complete that project before
2030, which is why we are
anticipating not just the
upcoming procurement to have
some hybrid vehicles in it, but
also the subsequent procurements
through the end of the decade
and in terms of next steps for
this work, we if the board
signals and makes the policy
change today, we would very much
like to designate potrero as the
trolley hub. We are recommending
that we temporarily store the 60
foot trolleys while we do the
potrero construction. We had
previously talked about building
some very expensive temporary
facilities and with our 2018
vehicle demands, that would have
been absolutely necessary. But
but as I said, because this is a
living document, because we
understand now that our short
term vehicle demand is
relatively short, we can an
approach it in this more cost
effective way. We also would
like to continue to pursue a
combination of procuring hybrids
and electric vehicles. The
action before you today would be
to revise is the zero emission
policy and then we would be
bringing you later this year or
early next year a procurement
for our replacement vehicles
initially with new flier to by
94 hybrid vehicles. As 7 in 40
foot electric vehicles and then
the six 60 foot trolley vehicles
. And then I'm also very excited
that gillig, which is a bay area
based bus manufacturer and has
not been interested in the past
in selling sfmta busses, has
been really excited about how
we're approaching our
maintenance work, how we are
striving towards partnerships
with the private sector. And so
they have also agreed to build.
Five 40 foot trolley busses as
and then lastly, I want to flag
that we do anticipate needing to
come to you in 2024 for to
approve an exemption to the to
the carb policy in order to have
this mixed procurement approach.
This graph here, I think tracks
our transition. We would be.
Targeting 2040, which is about
how long we think that the
facility program is going to
take in order to support this
work, but also continuing to be
nimble and make changes in real
time if things start to be more
complicated than we're currently
expecting. And the last topic
that I want to talk about before
I wrap up is that we are very
committed to having a just
transition for our workers and
really make sure that this board
knows that this work will not
result in any job loss for our
our current amazing maintenance
staff. We are very, very
fortunate that the we took the
hybrid approach to this
transition because the vehicles
are so similar. Our we have been
able to train our automotive
mechanics that maintain the
hybrid vehicles to maintain the
pilot busses with really no more
additional training than what
they would receive with any new
bus. We also are so fortunate
that we have a traction power.
The staff already working on the
trolley vehicles that would
expand their scope to support
the electric location of our
facilities. So we do not have
some of the complicated job
training and transition needs
that the rest of the industry
has. But we are also
continuously tracking this work
and making sure our staff
understand that we remain vested
in them as we make this
transition an I think that i
have made the mistake in the
past when we've talked to
different policy groups about
electrification to be overly
rosy. This is the last hybrids
will bring you or this is the
last, last hybrids that will
bring you. I'm trying to take a
different tone today, which is
to say in many ways, I think the
plan that we have laid out for
you is the best case scenario.
It assumes funding that we still
do not have in hand. It includes
coordination with a regional
utility provider that is trying
to scale up not just for san
francisco and not just for
transit, but across multiple
sectors as many, many parts of
the city are moving towards zero
electrification. So we are
trying to manage those risks by
doing this planning, by working
with pga on what our big need is
as well as the specific projects
that we are looking all over the
country to try to understand how
the different properties are
approaching this and what we can
learn. We have been doing a lot
of outreach on this because it's
not necessarily intuitive. You
know, how does continuing to buy
hybrids or easing up on our
policy help with emissions and
taking the time I think to
explain the connection between
mode share and also some of the
challenges with facility
electrification I think has been
time really well spent. And
we're really proud that we've
received several letters of
support for this policy change
from groups that are year or two
ago really didn't even want to
entertain the idea of a policy
change. And I think there's a
general interest in particularly
the environmental advocacy
community, to want to make sure
that we continue anew, to charge
ahead as quickly as we can, but
also a recognition that we need
to do so in a way that is
practical and fundable and does
not compromise our current
service. I'm also grateful for
our close partnership with the
department of the environment on
this work and really thinking
through how this fits into the
city's overall climate action
plan, which ultimately is our
guiding document. So the today's
action before you is to amend
the zero emission policy. It is
to align it with the california
air resources board, which is
currently targeting 2040. It
also would allow us to continue
to invest in in all forms of
zero emissions vehicles, which
allows us the flexibility to
make decision plans based on
different facility constraints
and also to learn over time and.
To really integrate zero zero
electrification in vehicles into
our overall climate change
approach and make sure that we
are driving forward in a way
that is complementary to our
ultimate mode. Shift goals and
doesn't contradict it or put it
at tension. Thank you. Thank
you. Directors, are there
questions for director
kirschbaum before we go to
public comment? Director
heminger. Thank you, MADAM Chair
. Julie, I actually had a
question about the slide. You
didn't show on the trolley
expansion. Is there a way to
bring that up? There it is. And
maybe you could just help me
reconcile. You know, we were
sort of full of praises for the
trolley earlier in the meeting,
and this is considerably more
negative. Um, so I believe I
don't know whether this is a
response in part to the proposal
that we saw from the electrical
workers. But I do want to ask
the question anew. Why not
instead of what? What did jeff
say? Hauling those two tons of
batteries up and down our hills?
Why not expand the trolley
network and achieve the same
purpose? Thank you for that
question. I my apologies that
this slide came off as negative
because we are very enthusiastic
about trolleys and in particular
we are enthused about the
evolution of trolleys which
include in motion charging. We
are currently testing it on four
of our vehicles and will be able
to expand it to the entire
almost 300 vehicle trolley fleet
. What it does is it allows us
to go 5 to 10 miles off wire and
then recharge within about 45
minutes. So it has a lot of
advantages and we very much
believe that trolleys are an
important part of our zero
emission future. And that we
should continue to invest in
future generations of trolley
vehicles. We are are cautiously
optimistic that the biggest
hurdle that we faced in 2018 we
MAY be able to address, which is
we cannot stay vested in trolley
vehicles if there isn't a
trolley bus to buy. And when we
bought the current vehicles us,
there was one manufacturer, new
flier. They only agreed. To
design a trolley bus because as
we join seattle so we really had
buying power and they said don't
don't get used to it. This is
this is the last one in under
jeff's leadership, bob and
gayatri, who is here, pulled
together a trolley consortium of
five north american agencies to
signal to the manufacturer, hey,
we're we're going to continue to
stay vested in trolleys and even
if you're not too interested in
any one of us collectively, we
start to have some some decent
numbers. Nothing compared to
diesel or electric busses, but
still something that is can be
cost effective. It's been very
successful. And one of the
things that we were most excited
about during the trolley
conference was solaris, a
european bus manufacturer attend
ing and signaling that they will
be entering the us bus market.
It to not only build battery
electric busses, but to also
build trolley busses and bring
all of that european trolley
experience to san francisco in
in the short term trolley
expansion has all of the same
challenges as the battery
electric do because we currently
only have two trolley facilities
and we're about to close one of
them for a 3 to 4 year
construction period. We also
have a really aging ing
infrastructure, so I'm hesitant
to build new wires and new
substations when we have
substations that are 50 years
old and very badly need to be
replaced. But what's exciting
about the inmotion charging is
we don't necessarily need to
paper over the city with new
wires. We can really take
advantage of corridors that
already have a portion of wires.
So for example, a corridor like
the seven eight, which has
overhead wires on haight street
and market street but doesn't
have them in the sunset, could
become a trolley route. So we
very much do think that trolleys
are part of the future. They MAY
even be part of our expansion
past 2030, but they don't have
any immediate expansion
capability because of our
facility constraints. But that's
something that over over a
relatively short time will be
remedied, right? Absolutely
okay. Well, I'm glad I asked the
question because you sound more
positive than your words, at
least as I read them at. And
carb is on board with this. I
mean, they've reached the point
where they're they're willing to
say that a trolley powered by
hydro up in the sierra is zero
emission. Yes, they are. Okay,
well, that's good. That's
progress. I certainly support
the policy change as you're
proposing today. I think we
probably as a city jump the gun
a little bit before we needed to
and now have to backtrack a bit.
I think carb has woken up and
smelled the coffee and I very
much appreciate the comments
text you gave us at the
beginning, because what what
we're doing here is chasing a
vanishingly small source of
emissions means if you want a
big source of emissions, go talk
to the commercial trucking
industry. And I recall when we
got involved with carb on this
as a region, we said, couldn't
you go pick on somebody your own
size because public transit is
worried about just opening the
doors every morning. But look,
they're on the search of all the
emissions, not just the small
ones and the big ones. So i
appreciate the fact that they're
, I think, making a reasonable
course correction and that we
are to thank you, great other
colleagues, directors so. Thank
you for the presentation then I
would like to I'm looking at the
slide with all the
electrification on the of our
properties and what you
mentioned was that only maybe 1
or 2, it's I think it's this
one, only 1 or 2 are funded. And
so, so it's like I'd like to
hear a little bit more about how
if it's even, what is the
likelihood of like these there's
the right bus for us to buy and
we have the money and already
build these facilities to
migrate them to electrification
means that these busses needs.
Um, I think that's something we
are going to learn more over
time. We are are going after
every grant opportunity city. We
did face a pretty significant
setback with the geo bond. That
would have been a major infusion
of resources for our facility
program which is just in general
a hard program to fund. So I, I
don't know that I have a sense
of what our odds are in terms of
funding. We are leaving no stone
unturned. We are going after
every every source available to
us. Okay well, thank you. So
director hensey, any further
questions? No questions. I'll
just say I'm in alignment with
director hemminger on this very
part of the item. I. I
understand the previous board,
um, or attempting to be leaders
in this area. And I think we are
and I think we as an agency, we
are a leader in green bus
transportation. We um, and I
think we should keep that as our
goal and, and fortunately by the
time I outlined in the current
policy before today's action, I
just don't see a path forward in
getting the facilities that we
need for, for the zero emission
vehicles by the time outlined in
the current policy. So again,
very supportive and appreciative
of staff bringing this forward.
I think it's a practical
approach. To do this. Um issue.
So thank you. And, and after
public comment, I'll be happy to
make a motion to approve this
item. Thank you, director henzi
I'd like to open it up for
public comment, but for anyone
in the room on this item 12 at
this time, actually, chair egan,
I did have department of
environment staff on the webex
and I believe they did want to
share some words. Okay. Thank
you. So tyrone, hi there, it's
leo kai. I'm the deputy director
for san francisco environment.
Tyrone wasn't able to make it
today, but he asked me to attend
on his behalf. Um, I wanted to
just affirm that the board item
that you're hearing does align
with the city's sustainability
goals and that our department
supports the plan being put
forward by staff. As quick
background for the public to san
francisco environment department
is responsible for coordinating
the implementation of the 2021
climate action plan, which was
unanimous unanimously approved
by the san francisco board of
supervisors and signed by mayor
breed as well. Our goals are
codified under chapter nine of
the environment code and the
code calls for net zero emission
by 2040. So director zhou and I
met with the sfmta team and
support the plan revisions as
emphasized during julie's
presentation, san francisco does
indeed have one of the cleanest
municipal fleets in the nation
and such a robust public transit
system. And as we electrify the
transportation and building
sectors, we do see and I wanted
to confirm that there is indeed
a statewide challenge of
improving the electric grid. So
it is really important. We also
need to ensure that we are
continuing to maximize ridership
and that requires us to ensure
operational, reliable city.
That's the key thing. So the
adjustment proposed in the
timeline still fits with our
overarching climate goals of net
zero emissions by 2040, and it
accounts for changes in the
landscape around implement and
funding. So thanks to the mta
board for letting me speak today
, thank you for that context.
It's very helpful. Thanks for
joining us. You're welcome. Uh,
go to public comment now. All
right. Thank you. Thank you.
Board members. My name is alex
lansberg, research advocacy
director for with the san
francisco electric construction
industry. And pardon me, I've
been talking way too much today,
so for the past few months I've
been appearing before you to
speak about the importance of
leveraging our existing overhead
line network for decarbonizing
san francisco's transit system.
So I'm glad to see this
monumental policy change before
you and want to thank director
tumlin for his leadership in
bringing it about. While this
represents an important
turnaround from the plan to
eliminate that network a few
years ago, there's a lot more
work to be done simply put,
electrifying muni quickly and
economically. I mean, we heard
what a billion and a half
dollars already will require a
creative approach to integrating
new technology and leveraging
our existing infrastructure.
What does this mean in practice?
This number one, no new diesel
purchases sfmta must first
analyze how to deploy the dozens
. I think we've got over 100 now
total of its unused trolley
busses before making a massive
capital expenditure on diesel to
do, we need to analyze the high
opportunity trolley bus
deployment opportunities that we
showed in our map. The 7 to 9
were on there. I think the 38
needs to be incorporated as part
of the gary rapid transit
planning to see what we can do
there and we need to revisit the
yard redevelopment plans because
as we can see, they are actually
working against us on these
things. So thank you for moving
this forward. A couple of
things. I know I only have like
30s left on specifically around
the adequacy of the grid. I
think one of the things, one of
the really important things that
our study showed is just the
much, much more robust energy
management and efficiency of the
trolley bus network. A good
example is compare bring what
they're doing in geneva versus
columbia. Columbia carries one
line, carries six times as many
people at half the energy load
compared to another line in
geneva. So I think that that's
absolutely critical. The second
the second one is on
manufacturing capacity. I think
what we're seeing, I know what
we're seeing is other agencies
are going to deal with this.
Let's have the next speaker jump
in. Okay. Thank you so much.
Chair egan, director tomlin and
members of the board. My name is
mark sawchuck. I'm a daily muni
rider and I'm also a member of
the community working group that
is advising muni on the
reconfiguration of the muni
metro system. But today we're
here to talk about a different
form of electric trans
transportation, the trolley bus
system. I submitted a letter of
support for this agenda item,
but I feel so strongly about it
I decided I needed to come down
here as well today for almost 90
years, since 1935, san
francisco's trolley bus system,
the most extensive in the united
states, has combined excellent
reliability, superb performance,
especially on the city's unique
topography and unbeatable
environmental credentials. But
the 2018 zero emissions policy
made what at least to me was
always a bewildering decision to
plan for a total phase out of
the trolley bus network in favor
of battery electric busses.
While I support these and I
support hybrid busses on routes
that are not currently wired,
they still can't match the
unparalleled performance of the
tried and true trolley bus.
Therefore, I strongly encourage
you to support this agenda item
which amends the 2018 policy and
explicitly recognizes the
trolleybus network's value and
future contribution to a 100%
zero emissions fleet. Let's not
repeat the mistake of the 1950s,
when the city gave up most of
its remaining streetcar lines.
We learned then that once
transportation infrastructure is
gone, we never get it back. And
with no shade to the muni metro
system, about which we've just
heard lots about the upgrade
plans, the trolley bus system is
the crown jewel of the muni
system. Let's treat it as such.
Thank you. Thank you for your
comments. Next speaker, please.
Um, why does why did carb not
see the lights and why do they
pick on transit agencies to
improve? It's the same thing
that sfmta sadly suffers from.
It's very hard to say no to cars
, but we've got to the I'm
curious what the trolley bus
pricing is in contrast to the
hybrid and the battery electric
bus pricing mainten bus is going
to be lower for battery electric
busses and trolleys will
absolutely be lower, too. I know
you have to translate that into
maintaining the catenary, but
it's still going to be cheaper.
We need to say no, just out of
principle in the city. No more
diesel. None. None should be
purchased. It's just a silly way
to spend our money and we do. I
remember your words, chair
aitken, about about how much is
it going to cost to get us what
we want to get us? What we
deserve? You've said this for
active transportation. What does
it take to get us this connected
network to get us a safe streets
that our city is worthy of what
people any person deserves to
have? What is the same thing we
need for our transit network?
That is what we need to be
working towards. What is that
number? And how do we roll it
out? And I'm not saying you just
spend it all, but we have to
start limiting cars. We have to
make it expensive. We have to
make it difficult. We have to
take the lanes and we have to
charge them and take that money
and put it towards transit and
active transportation. And I
it's very difficult to hear that
we don't have the money or we've
got to buy this because it's
cheaper and whatever. When I
know it's costly in many other
ways over the long haul. Please
charge the cars and make the
transit and active
transportation that we need.
Thanks guys. Thank you. Next
speaker, please. Good afternoon,
directors. My name is cyrus hall
. I urge you to move forward
with the suggested modifications
to muni policy. I want to
highlight a couple of really
important changes here that
julie talked about. One is
resynchronizing vehicle purchase
schedules with capital plans
around facility upgrades to
synchronizing the vehicle plans
of carbs policies, including
carbs recognition of trolley
busses as zero emission vehicles
, and three vitally re-embracing
the trolley busses as part of
the agency's zev plans. I really
agree with what was said that
the environmental north star and
best option for reducing
emissions is making sure that we
can increase service and keep
service stable and we need to do
whatever it takes to make that
happen. But I am concerned that
the suggested plan to purchase a
significant number of new diesel
hybrids when we know that
hundreds of trolley busses, not
hundreds, around 100 trolley
busses will be sitting idle
because of a lack of space for
regular maintenance during the
patrol yard redevelopment that
there had been a plan to provide
temporary space to continue the
use of these already purchased
trolley busses. That space was
reallocated and my
understanding, because it was
needed elsewhere. And my
question today is rather than
buying as large of a new fleet
of diesel hybrids as being
suggested, can we find space and
get those busses back on the
road? We already own them. Is
there a cost effective plan to
make that happen? I would also
ask you to reconsider yard
redevelopment plans in light of
today's policy changes. The
presidio yard, for example,
could accommodate modern amc
trolley busses as yard
redevelopment should be done in
alignment with comprehensive
system electrification analysis
that reflects the challenges of
b e b's, battery electrics and
the fit to function nature of
trolley busses. I also want to
say I deeply appreciate I'm
looking at this from the
outside. It's a very complex
topic and I appreciate staff's
dedication and hard work to make
these decisions in the most
efficient way possible. Thank
you very much. I'm not seeing
any other speakers in the room.
Please go to remote at this
time. We'll move to remote
public comment not to exceed a
total time of ten minutes.
Members of the public wishing to
comment should dial star three
to enter the queue each speaker
will have two minutes. Moderator
first speaker. Thanks again,
chair amanda. Alida dupree. For
the record, she and her I'm
simply an ordinary user of muni
and other systems. I do support
trolley busses. We should not
remove one foot of wire. I think
that we should consider the
expansion of trolley bus network
and that should be a part of our
toolbox. But I don't think that
we should buy any more diesel
vehicles or is even renewable.
Diesel does produce particulates
which are impactful,
unfortunately, and not so good
ways. Maybe not as much as
straight petroleum diesel, but
it does produce particulates and
limited production. Run of
renewable diesel. That diesel
would be probably better used in
the trucking industry or the
railroad industry because
they're going to take a lot more
time to transition than what we
can do here. It doesn't seem
like it's hard to get charging
equipment. There's charging
stations for cars and light
vehicles being built all over
the country, some of which have
capabilities as high as 350kw
more than what we would use for
a bus change is hard, but I
practiced my values by living in
a home that operates on 100%
solar energy, electricity and my
home. Is 100% electric. We have
no gas service in here and I
don't want it 30s and I take 53
years of using the new york city
subway, which runs on
electricity. So san francisco
has a very green fleet, but to
me, buying diesel busses is like
using candles to power for a
power failure in your home.
Instead of a flashlight. I
choose to look forward. Thank
you. Thank you. Next speaker.
hello I cape grasteinn. I'm also
a regular transit rider and I'm
exiting the comics by alex and
cyrus and other people that
yeah, we should really look to
avoid diesel purchases because
we have operating costs that are
both will probably be higher and
also are unknowable and could be
much higher. Diesel prices go up
exponential. Suddenly we have
dozens, as I said, unused
trolley busses and we could
really try to use them and we
can try to deploy these trolley
busses like, for example, the
seven and nine lines or
candidates that we could use for
bus rapid transit and then also
install in motion charging. So I
think I think there's a way to
really focus on avoiding diesel
and looking at continuing
trolley busses and looking at
maybe different way to redevelop
the portrayal yard in the
context of emphasizing trolley
busses. So yeah, I would urge
sfmta to do that. Thank you.
Thank you. Next speaker, our.
Speaker, you've been unmuted.
Good afternoon. Good afternoon.
My name is pete wilson. I am a
trolley bus operator. I'm asking
that you do not close potrero
the crown jewel of our busses
are the electric 60 foot trolley
busses, like on the five, the
14, the 30, the 49. Please don't
close potrero trolleys charged
during the day while they drive,
not back at the yard with huge
storage batteries at the yards.
Please don't close potrero.
There's a spot behind me where
the plan was all along to put
our busses back there. Now we're
going to put our busses back
there in mothball them. Please
don't close potrero. Many cities
like la pulled their tracks out
in the 50s. We now have another
opportunity to notice a lot of
people pulled out their wires
like cambridge just did not. So
excuse me, their wires are still
up, but they just got rid of
their busses. So don't close
potrero renewal. Renewable
diesel is decreases carbon by
65. That's still 35% carbon
don't close potrero potrero is
central. Yes with julie alluding
to getting rid of presidio.
Please don't. We need to expand?
We don't need to contract.
Please don't close potrero.
Thank you very much. Thank you.
Next speaker. Good afternoon.
This is peter strauss. I'm on
the board of san francisco
transit riders and I'm speaking,
which I think I can be pretty
brief, but I'm urging you to
support the staff's
recommendation today. This is a
very appropriate and necessary
course correction to the 2018
policy, which in many ways was
short sighted and inappropriate.
And this is the right step for
the agency and the right step
for carb to allow the continued
use of trolley coaches at this
time. Um, that said, within this
policy, I'm very encouraged by
the last thing julie referred
to, which was the improved
batteries for the trolley coach
fleet that will allow the in
motion and route charger thing
and urge the staff to consider
the use of trolley coaches with
such batteries at the earliest
possible time on such lines as
the seven and the nine which
operate mostly under wire today
and can be expanded to make
better use of our trolley coach
fleet and electrify them fully
that much sooner. Thank you for
your time and thank you for your
consideration of this. Thank
you. Next speaker. This is
herbert weiner. I strongly
support the proposals, but I do
think you have to restore the 47
potrero and three jackson lines.
They are very important trolley
lines and I think the city
really misses them. So to
enhance trolley service, please
restore these lines. They're
very important to the public.
Thank you. Thank you. We have no
additional callers. Okay. We'll
close public comment. Director
kirschbaum. I just wonder if you
might be willing to address some
of the themes that we heard in
public comment around the sort
of desire for a bright line of
no new diesel purchases. And the
question about whether trolley
busses could play more of a role
in our needs going forward. Yeah
absolutely. When we were first
planning to move potrero during
construction, we had a peak bus
demand of about 630 vehicles at
and we didn't have a bus to
spare because every other
vehicle we were using to do the
maintenance that I'm always
bragging about our current peak
demand is just over 500. So we
are in a much different
situation than we were in 2018.
In 2018, our vehicle, our
facility program was being
anchored by the fact that we
were planning to spend had about
$150 million to move potrero
this would not be a facility
that we owned. It was a port
owned facility and it would be
an investment with a very short
term purpose. So I'm very
grateful that we've been able to
shift the plan and take some of
those precious dollars and
invest them in in kirkland,
which we see as the first all
electric facility. I also want
to point out that while our
current demand is about 510, I
very much believe that we are
going to need to grow our
service. S as the city recovers,
as we come up with stronger our
financial approach is
collectively to get transit back
to a thriving state. So I don't
think that we can look to the
vehicles that were storing as
our answer because they will be
back on the road by 2028. The
vehicles that I'm talking about
purchasing in 2025 and 2026 will
have a 12 year lifespan as well.
Well past that kind of two year
bridge. So I do enthusiastically
support trolley. It's exciting
to see so many san franciscans
really express their love for
this unique and important mode.
But I do believe that some of
the advocacy has been
significantly oversimplified and
does not look at all of the
complexities of a large scale
trolley expansion. Well okay. I
think we had a motion. Is that
right? Or director lindsay, were
you going to make a motion? Oh,
MADAM Chair, I'd be happy to.
Yes. Thank you. Is there a
second? I will approval second.
Great. Please call the roll on
the motion to approve director
heminger heminger. Director
henderson I henderson. I
director hinsey kinsey I
director. So I. So I chair eken.
I eken. I thank you that item is
approved and concludes the
business before you today. Okay.
Thank you. Colleagues, staff,
members of the public. We are
adjourned. Next meeting started
in NOVEMBER 21st and DECEMBER
5th.